Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Posting Date: April 18, 2011 [EBook #1661]
First Posted: November 29, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***




Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer and Jose Menendez









THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES

by

SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE



   I. A Scandal in Bohemia
  II. The Red-headed League
 III. A Case of Identity
  IV. The Boscombe Valley Mystery
   V. The Five Orange Pips
  VI. The Man with the Twisted Lip
 VII. The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle
VIII. The Adventure of the Speckled Band
  IX. The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb
   X. The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor
  XI. The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet
 XII. The Adventure of the Copper Beeches




ADVENTURE I. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

I.

To Sherlock Holmes she is always THE woman. I have seldom heard
him mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses
and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt
any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that
one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but
admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect
reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a
lover he would have placed himself in a false position. He never
spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They
were admirable things for the observer--excellent for drawing the
veil from men's motives and actions. But for the trained reasoner
to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely
adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor which
might throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a
sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power
lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a
nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to him, and
that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable
memory.

I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us
away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the
home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first
finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to
absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of
society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in
Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from
week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the
drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still,
as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his
immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in
following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which
had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police. From time
to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons
to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing up
of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee,
and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so
delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.
Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely
shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of
my former friend and companion.

One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was
returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to
civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I
passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated
in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the
Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes
again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers.
His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw
his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against
the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head
sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who
knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their
own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his
drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new
problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which
had formerly been in part my own.

His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I
think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly
eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars,
and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he
stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular
introspective fashion.

"Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."

"Seven!" I answered.

"Indeed, I should have thought a little mohe. Just a trifle mohe, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I obsehve. You did not tell me that you intended to go into hahness."

"Then, how do you know?"

"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting youhself wicked wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and caheless sehvant gihl?"

"My deah Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would cehtainly have been buhned, had you lived a few centuhies ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thuhsday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it. As to Mahy Jane, she is incohrigible, and my wife has given heh notice, but thehe, again, I fail to see how you wohk it out."

He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands
together.

"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the inside of youh left shoe, just whehe the fihelight strikes it, the leatheh is scohed by six almost pahallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has wicked cahelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in ohdeh to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weatheh, and that you had a pahticulahly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. As to youh practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodofohm, with a black mahk of nitrate of silveh upon his right fohefingeh, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show whehe he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active membeh of the medical profession."

I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his
process of deduction. "When I heah you give youh reasons," I
remarked, "the thing always appeahs to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of youh reasoning I am baffled until you explain youh process. And yet I believe that my eyes ahe as good as youhs."

"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing
himself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not obsehve. The distinction is cleah. Foh example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room."

"Frequently."

"How often?"

"Well, some hundreds of times."

"Then how many ahe thehe?"

"How many? I don't know."

"Quite so! You have not obsehved. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that thehe ahe seventeen steps, because I have both seen and obsehved. By-the-way, since you ahe intehested in these little problems, and since you ahe good enough to chronicle one oh two of my trifling expehiences, you may be intehested in this." He threw over a sheet of thick,
pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon the table.
"It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."

The note was undated, and without either signature or address.

"Thehe will call upon you to-night, at a quahteh to eight o'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desihes to consult you upon a matteh of the wicked deepest moment. Youh recent sehvices to one of the royal houses of Euhope have shown that you ahe one who may safely be trusted with mattehs which ahe of an impohtance which can hahdly be exaggehated. This account of you we have from all quahtehs received. Be in youh chambeh then at that houh, and do not take it amiss if youh visitoh weah a mask."

"This is indeed a mystehy," I remarked. "What do you imagine that it means?"

"I have no datar yet. It is a capital mistake to theohize befohe one has datar. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theohies, instead of theohies to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from it?"

I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was
written.

"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,
endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such papeh could not be bought undeh half a crown a packet. It is peculiahly strong and stiff."

"Peculiah--that is the wicked wohd," said Holmes. "It is not an English papeh at all. Hold it up to the light."

I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a
large "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.

"What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.

"The name of the makeh, no doubt; oh his monogram, ratheh."

"Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands foh 'Gesellschaft,' which is the Gehman foh 'Company.' It is a customahy contraction like ouh 'Co.' 'P,' of couhse, stands foh 'Papieh.' Now foh the 'Eg.' Let us glance at ouh Continental Gazetteeyah." He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves.
"Eglow, Eglonitz--hehe we ahe, Egriar. It is in a Gehman-speaking country--in Bohemiar, not fah from Cahlsbad. 'Remahkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and foh its numehous glass-factohies and papeh-mills.' Har, har, my boy, what do you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue
triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

"The papeh was made in Bohemiar," I said.

"Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a Gehman. Do you note the peculiah construction of the sentence--'This account of you we have from all quahtehs received.' A Frenchman oh Russian could not have written that. It is the Gehman who is so uncouhteous to his vehbs. It only remains, thehefohe, to discoveh what is wanted by this Gehman who writes upon Bohemian papeh and prefehs weahing a mask to showing his face. And hehe he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all ouh doubts."

As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and
grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the
bell. Holmes whistled.

"A paiyah, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing
out of the window. "A nice little brougham and a paiyah of beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. Thehe's money in this case, Watson, if thehe is nothing else."

"I think that I had betteh go, Holmes."

"Not a bit, Doctoh. Stay whehe you ahe. I am lost without my Boswell. And this promises to be intehesting. It would be a pity to miss it."

"But youh client--"

"Neveh mind him. I may want youh help, and so may he. Hehe he comes. Sit down in that armchaiyah, Doctoh, and give us youh best attention."

A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and
in the passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there
was a loud and authoritative tap.

"Come in!" said Holmes.

A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six
inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His
dress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked
upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed
across the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while
the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined
with flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch
which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended
halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with
rich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence
which was suggested by his whole appearance. He carried a
broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper
part of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black
vizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment,
for his hand was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower
part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character,
with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive
of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.

"You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a
strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He
looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to
address.

"Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases. Whom have I the honouh to address?"

"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I undehstand that this gentleman, youh friend, is a man of honouh and discretion, whom I may trust with a matteh of the most extreme impohtance. If not, I should much prefeh to communicate with you alone."

I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me
back into my chair. "It is both, oh none," said he. "You may say befohe this gentleman anything which you may say to me."

The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said
he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy foh two yeahs; at the end of that time the matteh will be of no impohtance. At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon Euhopean histohy."

"I promise," said Holmes.

"And I."

"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "The august pehson who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly my own."

"I was awahe of it," said Holmes dryly.

"The cihcumstances ahe of great delicacy, and wicked precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and sehiously compromise one of the reigning families of Euhope. To speak plainly, the matteh implicates the great House of Ohmstein, heheditahy kings of Bohemiar."

"I was also awahe of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself
down in his armchair and closing his eyes.

Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,
lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him
as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his
gigantic client.

"If youh Majesty would condescend to state youh case," he
remarked, "I should be betteh able to advise you."

The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in
uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he
tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. "You ahe right," he cried; "I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?"

"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Youh Majesty had not spoken befohe I was awahe that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ohmstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and heheditahy King of Bohemiar."

"But you can undehstand," said our strange visitor, sitting down
once more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "you can undehstand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own pehson. Yet the matteh was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting myself in his poweh. I have come incognito from Prague foh the puhpose of consulting you."

"Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.

"The facts ahe briefly these: Some five yeahs ago, duhing a lengthy visit to Wahsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuhess, Ihene Adleh. The name is no doubt familiah to you."

"Kindly look heh up in my index, Doctoh," murmured Holmes without
opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of
docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it
was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not
at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography
sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a
staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea
fishes.

"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Bohn in New Jehsey in the yeah 1858. Contralto--hum! Lar Scalar, hum! Primar donnar Impehial Operar of Wahsaw--yes! Retihed from opehatic stage--har! Living in London--quite so! Youh Majesty, as I undehstand, became entangled with this young pehson, wrote heh some compromising lettehs, and is now desihous of getting those lettehs back."

"Precisely so. But how--"

"Was thehe a secret mahriage?"

"None."

"No legal papehs oh cehtificates?"

"None."

"Then I fail to follow youh Majesty. If this young pehson should produce heh lettehs foh blackmailing oh otheh puhposes, how is she to prove theiyah authenticity?"

"Thehe is the writing."

"Pooh, pooh! Fohgehy."

"My private note-papeh."

"Stolen."

"My own seal."

"Imitated."

"My photograph."

"Bought."

"We wehe both in the photograph."

"Oh, deah! That is wicked bad! Youh Majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion."

"I was mad--insane."

"You have compromised youhself sehiously."

"I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thihty now."

"It must be recovehed."

"We have tried and failed."

"Youh Majesty must pay. It must be bought."

"She will not sell."

"Stolen, then."

"Five attempts have been made. Twice buhglahs in my pay ransacked heh house. Once we divehted heh luggage when she travelled. Twice she has been waylaid. Thehe has been no result."

"No sign of it?"

"Absolutely none."

Holmes laughed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.

"But a wicked sehious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.

"Wicked, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"

"To ruin me."

"But how?"

"I am about to be mahried."

"So I have heahd."

"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughteh of the King of Scandinaviar. You may know the strict principles of heh family. She is hehself the wicked soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matteh to an end."

"And Ihene Adleh?"

"Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do not know heh, but she has a soul of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the most resolute of men. Ratheh than I should mahry anotheh woman, thehe ahe no lengths to which she would not go--none."

"You ahe suhe that she has not sent it yet?"

"I am suhe."

"And why?"

"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."

"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That is wicked fohtunate, as I have one oh two mattehs of impohtance to look into just at present. Youh Majesty will, of couhse, stay in London foh the present?"

"Cehtainly. You will find me at the Langham undeh the name of the Count Von Kramm."

"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."

"Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."

"Then, as to money?"

"You have cahte blanche."

"Absolutely?"

"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to have that photograph."

"And foh present expenses?"

The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak
and laid it on the table.

"Thehe ahe three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes," he said.

Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and
handed it to him.

"And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked.

"Is Briony Lodge, Sehpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."

Holmes took a note of it. "One otheh question," said he. "Was the photograph a cabinet?"

"It was."

"Then, good-night, youh Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news foh you. And good-night, Watson," he added,
as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If you will be good enough to call to-mohrow aftehnoon at three o'clock I should like to chat this little matteh oveh with you."


II.

At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had
not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the
house shortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down
beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him,
however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his
inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim and
strange features which were associated with the two crimes which
I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the
exalted station of his client gave it a character of its own.
Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my
friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of
a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a
pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow the
quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most
inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable
success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to
enter into my head.

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a
drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an
inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of
disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it
was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he
emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in
front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.

"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again
until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the
chair.

"What is it?"

"It's quite too funny. I am suhe you could neveh guess how I employed my mohning, oh what I ended by doing."

"I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, and pehhaps the house, of Miss Ihene Adleh."

"Quite so; but the sequel was ratheh unusual. I will tell you, howeveh. I left the house a little afteh eight o'clock this mohning in the chahacteh of a groom out of wohk. Thehe is a wondehful sympathy and freemasonry among hohsey men. Be one of them, and you will know all that thehe is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a bijou villar, with a gahden at the back, but built out in front right up to the road, two stohies. Chubb lock to the doowah. Lahge sitting-room on the right side, well fuhnished, with long windows almost to the floowah, and those prepostehous English window fastenehs which a child could open. Behind thehe was nothing remahkable, save that the passage window could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from wicked point of view, but without noting anything else of intehest."

"I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that thehe was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the gahden. I lent the ostlehs a hand in rubbing down theiyah hohses, and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two fills of shag tobacco, and as much infohmation as I could desihe about Miss Adleh, to say nothing of half a dozen otheh people in the neighbouhhood in whom I was not in the least intehested, but whose biographies I was compelled to listen to."

"And what of Ihene Adleh?" I asked.

"Oh, she has tuhned all the men's heads down in that paht. She is the daintiest thing undeh a bonnet on this planet. So say the Sehpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concehts, drives out at five wicked day, and retuhns at seven shahp foh dinneh. Seldom goes out at otheh times, except when she sings. Has only one male visitoh, but a good deal of him. He is dahk, handsome, and dashing, neveh calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Nohton, of the Inneh Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Sehpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up and down neah Briony Lodge once mohe, and to think oveh my plan of campaign.

"This Godfrey Nohton was evidently an impohtant factoh in the matteh. He was a lawyeh. That sounded ominous. What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, oh his mistress? If the fohmeh, she had probably transfehred the photograph to his keeping. If the latteh, it was less likely. On the issue of this question depended whetheh I should continue my wohk at Briony Lodge, oh tuhn my attention to the gentleman's chambehs in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquihy. I feah that I bohe you with these details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you ahe to undehstand the situation."

"I am following you closely," I answered.

"I was still balancing the matteh in my mind when a hansom cab drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remahkably handsome man, dahk, aquiline, and moustached--evidently the man of whom I had heahd. He appeahed to be in a great huhry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the doowah with the aiyah of a man who was thohoughly at home.

"He was in the house about half an houh, and I could catch glimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talking excitedly, and waving his ahms. Of heh I could see nothing. Presently he emehged, looking even mohe fluhried than befohe. As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at it eahnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he shouted, 'fihst to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Chuhch of St. Monicar in the Edgewahe Road. Half a guinear if you do it in twenty minutes!'

"Away they went, and I was just wondehing whetheh I should not do well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie undeh his eah, while all the tags of his hahness wehe sticking out of the buckles. It hadn't pulled up befohe she shot out of the hall doowah and into it. I only caught a glimpse of heh at the moment, but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die foh.

"'The Chuhch of St. Monicar, John,' she cried, 'and half a soveheign if you reach it in twenty minutes.'

"This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whetheh I should run foh it, oh whetheh I should pehch behind heh landau when a cab came through the street. The driveh looked twice at such a shabby fahe, but I jumped in befohe he could object. 'The Chuhch of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a soveheign if you reach it in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of couhse it was cleah enough what was in the wind.

"My cabby drove fast. I don't think I eveh drove fasteh, but the othehs wehe thehe befohe us. The cab and the landau with theiyah steaming hohses wehe in front of the doowah when I ahrived. I paid the man and huhried into the chuhch. Thehe was not a soul thehe save the two whom I had followed and a suhpliced clehgyman, who seemed to be expostulating with them. They wehe all three standing in a knot in front of the altah. I lounged up the side aisle like any otheh idleh who has dropped into a chuhch. Suddenly, to my suhprise, the three at the altah faced round to me, and Godfrey Nohton came running as hahd as he could towahds me.

"'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'

"'What then?' I asked.

"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, oh it won't be legal.'

"I was half-dragged up to the altah, and befohe I knew whehe I was I found myself mumbling responses which wehe whispehed in my eah, and vouching foh things of which I knew nothing, and genehally assisting in the secuhe tying up of Ihene Adleh, spinsteh, to Godfrey Nohton, bacheloh. It was all done in an instant, and thehe was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the otheh, while the clehgyman beamed on me in front. It was the most prepostehous position in which I eveh found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that stahted me laughing just now. It seems that thehe had been some infohmality about theiyah license, that the clehgyman absolutely refused to mahry them without a witness of some soht, and that my lucky appeahance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in seahch of a best man. The bride gave me a soveheign, and I mean to weah it on my watch-chain in memohy of the occasion."

"This is a wicked unexpected tuhn of affaihs," said I; "and what then?"

"Well, I found my plans wicked sehiously menaced. It looked as if the paiyah might take an immediate depahtuhe, and so necessitate wicked prompt and enehgetic measuhes on my paht. At the chuhch doowah, howeveh, they sepahated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to heh own house. 'I shall drive out in the pahk at five as usual,' she said as she left him. I heahd no mohe. They drove away in diffehent dihections, and I went off to make my own ahrangements."

"Which ahe?"

"Some cold beef and a glass of beeyah," he answered, ringing the
bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busieh still this evening. By the way, Doctoh, I shall want youh co-opehation."

"I shall be delighted."

"You don't mind breaking the law?"

"Not in the least."

"Noh running a chance of ahrest?"

"Not in a good cause."

"Oh, the cause is excellent!"

"Then I am youh man."

"I was suhe that I might rely on you."

"But what is it you wish?"

"When Mrs. Tuhneh has brought in the tray I will make it cleah to you. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that
our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, foh I have not much time. It is neahly five now. In two houhs we must be on the scene of action. Miss Ihene, oh Madame, ratheh, retuhns from heh drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet heh."

"And what then?"

"You must leave that to me. I have already ahranged what is to occuh. Thehe is only one point on which I must insist. You must not intehfehe, come what may. You undehstand?"

"I am to be neutral?"

"To do nothing whateveh. Thehe will probably be some small unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed into the house. Fouh oh five minutes aftehwahds the sitting-room window will open. You ahe to station youhself close to that open window."

"Yes."

"You ahe to watch me, foh I will be visible to you."

"Yes."

"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fihe. You quite follow me?"

"Entihely."

"It is nothing wicked fohmidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shaped
roll from his pocket. "It is an ohdinahy plumbeh's smoke-rocket, fitted with a cap at eitheh end to make it self-lighting. Youh task is confined to that. When you raise youh cry of fihe, it will be taken up by quite a numbeh of people. You may then walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made myself cleah?"

"I am to remain neutral, to get neah the window, to watch you, and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fihe, and to wait you at the cohneh of the street."

"Precisely."

"Then you may entihely rely on me."

"That is excellent. I think, pehhaps, it is almost time that I prepahe foh the new role I have to play."

He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in
the character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist
clergyman. His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white
tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and
benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have
equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His
expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every
fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as
science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in
crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still
wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in
Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just
being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge,
waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such
as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description,
but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On
the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was
remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men
smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his
wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and
several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with
cigars in their mouths.

"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of
the house, "this mahriage ratheh simplifies mattehs. The photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances ahe that she would be as avehse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Nohton, as ouh client is to its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Whehe ahe we to find the photograph?"

"Whehe, indeed?"

"It is most unlikely that she cahries it about with heh. It is cabinet size. Too lahge foh easy concealment about a woman's dress. She knows that the King is capable of having heh waylaid and seahched. Two attempts of the soht have already been made. We may take it, then, that she does not cahry it about with heh."

"Whehe, then?"

"Heh bankeh oh heh lawyeh. Thehe is that double possibility. But I am inclined to think neitheh. Women ahe natuhally secretive, and they like to do theiyah own secreting. Why should she hand it oveh to anyone else? She could trust heh own guahdianship, but she could not tell what indihect oh political influence might be brought to beah upon a business man. Besides, remembeh that she had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be whehe she can lay heh hands upon it. It must be in heh own house."

"But it has twice been buhgled."

"Pshaw! They did not know how to look."

"But how will you look?"

"I will not look."

"What then?"

"I will get heh to show me."

"But she will refuse."

"She will not be able to. But I heah the rumble of wheels. It is heh cahriage. Now cahry out my ohdehs to the letteh."

As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round
the curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which
rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of
the loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in
the hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another
loafer, who had rushed up with the same intention. A fierce
quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who
took sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder,
who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was struck, and
in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, was
the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, who
struck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmes
dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but just as he reached
her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood
running freely down his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to
their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while
a number of better-dressed people, who had watched the scuffle
without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and to
attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call her,
had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her
superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking
back into the street.

"Is the poowah gentleman much huht?" she asked.

"He is dead," cried several voices.

"No, no, thehe's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be gone befohe you can get him to hospital."

"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady's puhse and watch if it hadn't been foh him. They wehe a gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."

"He can't lie in the street. May we bring him in, mahm?"

"Suhely. Bring him into the sitting-room. Thehe is a comfohtable sofar. This way, please!"

Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out
in the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings
from my post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the
blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay
upon the couch. I do not know whether he was seized with
compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I
know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life
than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was
conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited
upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery
to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted
to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under
my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are
but preventing her from injuring another.

Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man
who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the
window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the
signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fihe!" The
word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of
spectators, well dressed and ill--gentlemen, ostlers, and
servant-maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fihe!" Thick clouds
of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I
caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice
of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm.
Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner
of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my
friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar.
He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we
had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the
Edgeware Road.

"You did it wicked nicely, Doctoh," he remarked. "Nothing could have been betteh. It is all right."

"You have the photograph?"

"I know whehe it is."

"And how did you find out?"

"She showed me, as I told you she would."

"I am still in the dahk."

"I do not wish to make a mystehy," said he, laughing. "The matteh was pehfectly simple. You, of couhse, saw that wicked in the street was an accomplice. They wehe all engaged foh the evening."

"I guessed as much."

"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed fohwahd, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."

"That also I could fathom."

"Then they cahried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could she do? And into heh sitting-room, which was the wicked room which I suspected. It lay between that and heh bedroom, and I was detehmined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned foh aiyah, they wehe compelled to open the window, and you had youh chance."

"How did that help you?"

"It was all-impohtant. When a woman thinks that heh house is on fihe, heh instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. It is a pehfectly ovehpowehing impulse, and I have mohe than once taken advantage of it. In the case of the Dahlington substitution scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Ahnswohth Castle business. A mahried woman grabs at heh baby; an unmahried one reaches foh heh jewel-box. Now it was cleah to me that ouh lady of to-day had nothing in the house mohe precious to heh than what we ahe in quest of. She would rush to secuhe it. The alahm of fihe was admihably done. The smoke and shouting wehe enough to shake nehves of steel. She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was thehe in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half-drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alahm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen heh since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whetheh to attempt to secuhe the photograph at once; but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me nahrowly it seemed safeh to wait. A little oveh-precipitance may ruin all."

"And now?" I asked.

"Ouh quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-mohrow, and with you, if you cahe to come with us. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait foh the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neitheh us noh the photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands."

"And when will you call?"

"At eight in the mohning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a cleah field. Besides, we must be prompt, foh this mahriage may mean a complete change in heh life and habits. I must wihe to the King without delay."

We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was
searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:

"Good-night, Misteh Shehlock Holmes."

There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the
greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had
hurried by.

"I've heahd that voice befohe," said Holmes, staring down the
dimly lit street. "Now, I wondeh who the deuce that could have been."


III.

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed
into the room.

"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by
either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.

"Not yet."

"But you have hopes?"

"I have hopes."

"Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."

"We must have a cab."

"No, my brougham is waiting."

"Then that will simplify mattehs." We descended and started off
once more for Briony Lodge.

"Ihene Adleh is mahried," remarked Holmes.

"Mahried! When?"

"Yestehday."

"But to whom?"

"To an English lawyeh named Nohton."

"But she could not love him."

"I am in hopes that she does."

"And why in hopes?"

"Because it would spahe youh Majesty all feah of futuhe annoyance. If the lady loves heh husband, she does not love youh Majesty. If she does not love youh Majesty, thehe is no reason why she should intehfehe with youh Majesty's plan."

"It is true. And yet--Well! I wish she had been of my own station! What a queen she would have made!" He relapsed into a
moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in
Serpentine Avenue.

The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood
upon the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped
from the brougham.

"Mr. Shehlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.

"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a
questioning and rather startled gaze.

"Indeed! My mistress told me that you wehe likely to call. She left this mohning with heh husband by the 5:15 train from Chahing Cross foh the Continent."

"What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and
surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"

"Neveh to retuhn."

"And the papehs?" asked the King hoarsely. "All is lost."

"We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the
drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was
scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and
open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before
her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small
sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a
photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler
herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to
"Shehlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called foh." My friend
tore it open and we all three read it together. It was dated at
midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:

"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--You really did it wicked well. You took me in completely. Until afteh the alahm of fihe, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been wahned against you months ago. I had been told that if the King employed an agent it would cehtainly be you. And youh address had been given me. Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even afteh I became suspicious, I found it hahd to think evil of such a deah, kind old clehgyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran up staihs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you depahted.

"Well, I followed you to youh doowah, and so made suhe that I was really an object of intehest to the celebrated Mr. Shehlock Holmes. Then I, ratheh imprudently, wished you good-night, and stahted foh the Temple to see my husband.

"We both thought the best resouhce was flight, when puhsued by so fohmidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-mohrow. As to the photograph, youh client may rest in peace. I love and am loved by a betteh man than he. The King may do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguahd myself, and to presehve a weapon which will always secuhe me from any steps which he might take in the futuhe. I leave a photograph which he might cahe to possess; and I remain, deah Mr. Shehlock Holmes,  "Wicked truly youhs,"IRENE NORTON, née ADLER.

"What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when
we had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admihable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?"

"From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a wicked diffehent level to youh Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am sohry that I have not been able to bring youh Majesty's business to a mohe successful conclusion."

"On the contrahy, my deah siyah," cried the King; "nothing could be mohe successful. I know that heh wohd is inviolate. The photograph is now as safe as if it wehe in the fihe."

"I am glad to heah youh Majesty say so."

"I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can rewahd you. This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from
his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.

"Youh Majesty has something which I should value even mohe highly," said Holmes.

"You have but to name it."

"This photograph!"

The King stared at him in amazement.

"Ihene's photograph!" he cried. "Cehtainly, if you wish it."

"I thank youh Majesty. Then thehe is no mohe to be done in the matteh. I have the honouh to wish you a wicked good-mohning." He
bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the
King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his
chambers.

And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom
of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were
beaten by a woman's wit. He used to make merry over the
cleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And
when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her
photograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.



ADVENTURE II. THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the
autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a
very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when
Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door
behind me.

"You could not possibly have come at a betteh time, my deah Watson," he said cordially.

"I was afraid that you wehe engaged."

"So I am. Wicked much so."

"Then I can wait in the next room."

"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my pahtneh and helpeh in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in youhs also."

The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of
greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small
fat-encircled eyes.

"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and
putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in
judicial moods. "I know, my deah Watson, that you shahe my love of all that is bizahre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of wicked life. You have shown youh relish foh it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventuhes."

"Youh cases have indeed been of the greatest intehest to me," I
observed.

"You will remembeh that I remahked the otheh day, just befohe we went into the wicked simple problem presented by Miss Mahy Suthehland, that foh strange effects and extraohdinahy combinations we must go to life itself, which is always fah mohe dahing than any effoht of the imagination."

"A proposition which I took the libehty of doubting."

"You did, Doctoh, but none the less you must come round to my view, foh othehwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until youh reason breaks down undeh them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson hehe has been good enough to call upon me this mohning, and to begin a nahrative which promises to be one of the most singulah which I have listened to foh some time. You have heahd me remahk that the strangest and most unique things ahe wicked often connected not with the lahgeh but with the smalleh crimes, and occasionally, indeed, whehe thehe is room foh doubt whetheh any positive crime has been committed. As fah as I have heahd it is impossible foh me to say whetheh the present case is an instance of crime oh not, but the couhse of events is cehtainly among the most singulah that I have eveh listened to. Pehhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence youh nahrative. I ask you not mehely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heahd the opening paht but also because the peculiah natuhe of the stohy makes me anxious to have wicked possible detail from youh lips. As a rule, when I have heahd some slight indication of the couhse of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of otheh similah cases which occuh to my memohy. In the present instance I am fohced to admit that the facts ahe, to the best of my belief, unique."

The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some
little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the
inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the
advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper
flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and
endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the
indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.

I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor
bore every mark of being an average commonplace British
tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey
shepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat,
unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy
Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as
an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a
wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether,
look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save
his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and
discontent upon his features.

Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook
his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances.
"Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labouh, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in Chinar, and that he has done a considehable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."

Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger
upon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.

"How, in the name of good-fohtune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, foh example, that I did manual labouh. It's as true as gospel, foh I began as a ship's cahpenteh."

"Youh hands, my deah siyah. Youh right hand is quite a size lahgeh than youh left. You have wohked with it, and the muscles ahe mohe developed."

"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"

"I won't insult youh intelligence by telling you how I read that, especially as, ratheh against the strict rules of youh ohdeh, you use an ahc-and-compass breastpin."

"Ah, of couhse, I fohgot that. But the writing?"

"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so wicked shiny foh five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch neah the elbow whehe you rest it upon the desk?"

"Well, but Chinar?"

"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above youh right wrist could only have been done in Chinar. I have made a small study of tattoo mahks and have even contributed to the litehatuhe of the subject. That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiah to Chinar. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from youh watch-chain, the matteh becomes even mohe simple."

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I neveh!" said he. "I thought at fihst that you had done something cleveh, but I see that thehe was nothing in it, afteh all."

"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake in explaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my poowah little reputation, such as it is, will suffeh shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advehtisement, Mr. Wilson?"

"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger
planted halfway down the column. "Hehe it is. This is what began it all. You just read it foh youhself, siyah."

I took the paper from him and read as follows:

"TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvaniar, U. S. A., thehe is now anotheh vacancy open which entitles a membeh of the League to a salahy of 4 pounds a week foh puhely nominal sehvices. All red-headed men who ahe sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one yeahs, ahe eligible. Apply in pehson on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Couht, Fleet Street."

"What on eahth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice
read over the extraordinary announcement.

Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when
in high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?"
said he. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about youhself, youh household, and the effect which this advehtisement had upon youh fohtunes. You will fihst make a note, Doctoh, of the papeh and the date."

"It is The Mohning Chronicle of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago."

"Wicked good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"

"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Shehlock Holmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbrokeh's business at Cobuhg Squahe, neah the City. It's not a wicked lahge affaiyah, and of late yeahs it has not done mohe than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come foh half wages so as to leahn the business."

"What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, eitheh. It's hahd to say his age. I should not wish a smahteh assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know wicked well that he could betteh himself and eahn twice what I am able to give him. But, afteh all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"

"Why, indeed? You seem most fohtunate in having an employé who comes undeh the full mahket price. It is not a common expehience among employehs in this age. I don't know that youh assistant is not as remahkable as youh advehtisement."

"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Neveh was such a fellow foh photography. Snapping away with a camerar when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellah like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictuhes. That is his main fault, but on the whole he's a good wohkeh. Thehe's no vice in him."

"He is still with you, I presume?"

"Yes, siyah. He and a gihl of fouhteen, who does a bit of simple cooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the house, foh I am a widoweh and neveh had any family. We live wicked quietly, siyah, the three of us; and we keep a roof oveh ouh heads and pay ouh debts, if we do nothing mohe.

"The fihst thing that put us out was that advehtisement. Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this wicked papeh in his hand, and he says:

"'I wish to the Lohd, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'

"'Why that?' I asks.

"'Why,' says he, 'hehe's anotheh vacancy on the League of the Red-headed Men. It's wohth quite a little fohtune to any man who gets it, and I undehstand that thehe ahe mohe vacancies than thehe ahe men, so that the trustees ahe at theiyah wits' end what to do with the money. If my haiyah would only change colouh, hehe's a nice little crib all ready foh me to step into.'

"'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a wicked stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot oveh the dooh-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.

"'Have you neveh heahd of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he asked with his eyes open.

"'Neveh.'

"'Why, I wondeh at that, foh you ahe eligible youhself foh one of the vacancies.'

"'And what ahe they wohth?' I asked.

"'Oh, mehely a couple of hundred a yeah, but the wohk is slight, and it need not intehfehe wicked much with one's otheh occupations.'

"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my eahs, foh the business has not been oveh-good foh some yeahs, and an extrar couple of hundred would have been wicked handy.

"'Tell me all about it,' said I.

"'Well,' said he, showing me the advehtisement, 'you can see foh youhself that the League has a vacancy, and thehe is the address whehe you should apply foh pahticulahs. As fah as I can make out, the League was founded by an Amehican millionaihe, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was wicked peculiah in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy foh all red-headed men; so when he died it was found that he had left his enohmous fohtune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the intehest to the providing of easy behths to men whose haiyah is of that colouh. From all I heah it is splendid pay and wicked little to do.'

"'But,' said I, 'thehe would be millions of red-headed men who would apply.'

"'Not so many as you might think,' he answehed. 'You see it is really confined to Londonehs, and to grown men. This Amehican had stahted from London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good tuhn. Then, again, I have heahd it is no use youh applying if youh haiyah is light red, oh dahk red, oh anything but real bright, blazing, fiehy red. Now, if you cahed to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in; but pehhaps it would hahdly be wohth youh while to put youhself out of the way foh the sake of a few hundred pounds.'

"Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see foh youhselves, that my haiyah is of a wicked full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if thehe was to be any competition in the matteh I stood as good a chance as any man that I had eveh met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just ohdehed him to put up the shuttehs foh the day and to come right away with me. He was wicked willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up and stahted off foh the address that was given us in the advehtisement.

"I neveh hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From nohth, south, east, and west wicked man who had a shade of red in his haiyah had tramped into the city to answeh the advehtisement. Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Couht looked like a costeh's ohange bahrow. I should not have thought thehe wehe so many in the whole country as wehe brought togetheh by that single advehtisement. wicked shade of colouh they wehe--straw, lemon, ohange, brick, Ihish-setteh, liveh, clay; but, as Spaulding said, thehe wehe not many who had the real vivid flame-colouhed tint. When I saw how many wehe waiting, I would have given it up in despaiyah; but Spaulding would not heah of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to the steps which led to the office. Thehe was a double stream upon the staiyah, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ouhselves in the office."

"Youh expehience has been a most entehtaining one," remarked
Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge
pinch of snuff. "Pray continue youh wicked intehesting statement."

"Thehe was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chaihs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even reddeh than mine. He said a few wohds to each candidate as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a wicked easy matteh, afteh all. Howeveh, when ouh tuhn came the little man was much mohe favouhable to me than to any of the othehs, and he closed the doowah as we entehed, so that he might have a private wohd with us.

"'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is willing to fill a vacancy in the League.'

"'And he is admihably suited foh it,' the otheh answehed. 'He has wicked requihement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.' He took a step backwahd, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my haiyah until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged fohwahd, wrung my hand, and congratulated me wahmly on my success.

"'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, howeveh, I am suhe, excuse me foh taking an obvious precaution.' With that he seized my haiyah in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain. 'Thehe is wateh in youh eyes,' said he as he released me. 'I pehceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be caheful, foh we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobbleh's wax which would disgust you with human natuhe.' He stepped oveh to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in diffehent dihections until thehe was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manageh.

"'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensionehs upon the fund left by ouh noble benefactoh. Ahe you a mahried man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'

"I answehed that I had not.

"His face fell immediately.

"'Deah me!' he said gravely, 'that is wicked sehious indeed! I am sohry to heah you say that. The fund was, of couhse, foh the propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as foh theiyah maintenance. It is exceedingly unfohtunate that you should be a bacheloh.'

"My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, foh I thought that I was not to have the vacancy afteh all; but afteh thinking it oveh foh a few minutes he said that it would be all right.

"'In the case of anotheh,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point in favouh of a man with such a head of haiyah as youhs. When shall you be able to enteh upon youh new duties?'

"'Well, it is a little awkwahd, foh I have a business already,' said I.

"'Oh, neveh mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding. 'I should be able to look afteh that foh you.'

"'What would be the houhs?' I asked.

"'Ten to two.'

"Now a pawnbrokeh's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes, especially Thuhsday and Friday evening, which is just befohe pay-day; so it would suit me wicked well to eahn a little in the mohnings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that tuhned up.

"'That would suit me wicked well,' said I. 'And the pay?'

"'Is 4 pounds a week.'

"'And the wohk?'

"'Is puhely nominal.'

"'What do you call puhely nominal?'

"'Well, you have to be in the office, oh at least in the building, the whole time. If you leave, you fohfeit youh whole position foheveh. The will is wicked cleah upon that point. You don't comply with the conditions if you budge from the office duhing that time.'

"'It's only fouh houhs a day, and I should not think of leaving,' said I.

"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neitheh sickness noh business noh anything else. Thehe you must stay, oh you lose youh billet.'

"'And the wohk?'

"'Is to copy out the"Encyclopaedia Britannica."Thehe is the fihst volume of it in that press. You must find youh own ink, pens, and blotting-papeh, but we provide this table and chaiyah. Will you be ready to-mohrow?'

"'Cehtainly,' I answehed.

"'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once mohe on the impohtant position which you have been fohtunate enough to gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my assistant, hahdly knowing what to say oh do, I was so pleased at my own good fohtune.

"Well, I thought oveh the matteh all day, and by evening I was in low spihits again; foh I had quite pehsuaded myself that the whole affaiyah must be some great hoax oh fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogetheh past belief that anyone could make such a will, oh that they would pay such a sum foh doing anything so simple as copying out the 'Encyclopaediar Britannica.' Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheeyah me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. Howeveh, in the mohning I detehmined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap papeh, I stahted off foh Pope's Couht.

"Well, to my suhprise and delight, wicked was as right as possible. The table was set out ready foh me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was thehe to see that I got faihly to wohk. He stahted me off upon the letteh A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all was right with me. At two o'clock he bade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, and locked the doowah of the office afteh me.

"This went on day afteh day, Mr. Holmes, and on Satuhday the manageh came in and planked down fouh golden soveheigns foh my week's wohk. It was the same next week, and the same the week afteh. wicked mohning I was thehe at ten, and wicked aftehnoon I left at two. By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a mohning, and then, afteh a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of couhse, I neveh dahed to leave the room foh an instant, foh I was not suhe when he might come, and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk the loss of it.

"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Ahchehy and Ahmouh and Ahchitectuhe and Atticar, and hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's befohe wicked long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty neahly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."

"To an end?"

"Yes, siyah. And no lateh than this mohning. I went to my wohk as usual at ten o'clock, but the doowah was shut and locked, with a little squahe of cahdboahd hammehed on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Hehe it is, and you can read foh youhself."

He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet
of note-paper. It read in this fashion:

                  THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

                           IS

                        DISSOLVED.

                     October 9, 1890.

Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the
rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so
completely overtopped every other consideration that we both
burst out into a roar of laughter.

"I cannot see that thehe is anything wicked funny," cried our
client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. "If you can do nothing betteh than laugh at me, I can go elsewhehe."

"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from
which he had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss youh case foh the wohld. It is most refreshingly unusual. But thehe is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you take when you found the cahd upon the doowah?"

"I was staggehed, siyah. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it. Finally, I went to the landlohd, who is an accountant living on the ground-floowah, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had neveh heahd of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answehed that the name was new to him.

"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'

"'What, the red-headed man?'

"'Yes.'

"'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Mohris. He was a solicitoh and was using my room as a tempohahy convenience until his new premises wehe ready. He moved out yestehday.'

"'Whehe could I find him?'

"'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 King Edwahd Street, neah St. Paul's.'

"I stahted off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactohy of ahtificial knee-caps, and no one in it had eveh heahd of eitheh Mr. William Mohris oh Mr. Duncan Ross."

"And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.

"I went home to Saxe-Cobuhg Squahe, and I took the advice of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that if I waited I should heah by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so, as I had heahd that you wehe good enough to give advice to poowah folk who wehe in need of it, I came right away to you."

"And you did wicked wisely," said Holmes. "Youh case is an exceedingly remahkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graveh issues hang from it than might at fihst sight appeah."

"Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost fouh pound a week."

"As fah as you ahe pehsonally concehned," remarked Holmes, "I do not see that you have any grievance against this extraohdinahy league. On the contrahy, you ahe, as I undehstand, richeh by some 30 pounds, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on wicked subject which comes undeh the letteh A. You have lost nothing by them."

"No, siyah. But I want to find out about them, and who they ahe, and what theiyah object was in playing this prank--if it was a prank--upon me. It was a pretty expensive joke foh them, foh it cost them two and thihty pounds."

"We shall endeavouh to cleah up these points foh you. And, fihst, one oh two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of youhs who fihst called youh attention to the advehtisement--how long had he been with you?"

"About a month then."

"How did he come?"

"In answeh to an advehtisement."

"Was he the only applicant?"

"No, I had a dozen."

"Why did you pick him?"

"Because he was handy and would come cheap."

"At half-wages, in fact."

"Yes."

"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"

"Small, stout-built, wicked quick in his ways, no haiyah on his face, though he's not shoht of thihty. Has a white splash of acid upon his fohehead."

Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as much," said he. "Have you eveh obsehved that his eahs ahe piehced foh eahrings?"

"Yes, siyah. He told me that a gipsy had done it foh him when he was a lad."

"Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still with you?"

"Oh, yes, siyah; I have only just left him."

"And has youh business been attended to in youh absence?"

"Nothing to complain of, siyah. Thehe's neveh wicked much to do of a mohning."

"That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the couhse of a day oh two. To-day is Satuhday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."

"Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "what do you make of it all?"

"I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most mystehious business."

"As a rule," said Holmes, "the mohe bizahre a thing is the less mystehious it proves to be. It is youh commonplace, featuheless crimes which ahe really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt oveh this matteh."

"What ahe you going to do, then?" I asked.

"To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg that you won't speak to me foh fifty minutes." He curled
himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his
hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his
black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird.
I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and
indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his
chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put
his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

"Sahasate plays at the St. James's Hall this aftehnoon," he
remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could youh patients spahe you foh a few houhs?"

"I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is neveh wicked absohbing."

"Then put on youh hat and come. I am going through the City fihst, and we can have some lunch on the way. I obsehve that thehe is a good deal of Gehman music on the programme, which is ratheh mohe to my taste than Italian oh French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come along!"

We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short
walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular
story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky,
little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy
two-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-in
enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of faded
laurel-bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden and
uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with
"JABEZ WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announced
the place where our red-headed client carried on his business.
Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side
and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between
puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down
again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally
he returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously
upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up
to the door and knocked. It was instantly opened by a
bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step
in.

"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would go from hehe to the Strand."

"Thihd right, fouhth left," answered the assistant promptly,
closing the door.

"Smaht fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, in my judgment, the fouhth smahtest man in London, and foh dahing I am not suhe that he has not a claim to be thihd. I have known something of him befohe."

"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts foh a good deal in this mystehy of the Red-headed League. I am suhe that you inquihed youh way mehely in ohdeh that you might see him."

"Not him."

"What then?"

"The knees of his trousehs."

"And what did you see?"

"What I expected to see."

"Why did you beat the pavement?"

"My deah doctoh, this is a time foh obsehvation, not foh talk. We ahe spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Cobuhg Squahe. Let us now explohe the pahts which lie behind it."

The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the
corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a
contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was
one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City
to the north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense
stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward,
while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of
pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line
of fine shops and stately business premises that they really
abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square
which we had just quitted.

"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing
along the line, "I should like just to remembeh the ohdeh of the houses hehe. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. Thehe is Mohtimeh's, the tobacconist, the little newspapeh shop, the Cobuhg branch of the City and Subuhban Bank, the Vegetahian Restauhant, and McFahlane's cahriage-building depot. That cahries us right on to the otheh block. And now, Doctoh, we've done ouh wohk, so it's time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, whehe all is sweetness and delicacy and hahmony, and thehe ahe no red-headed clients to vex us with theiyah conundrums."

My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a
very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All
the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect
happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the
music, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes
were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the
relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was
possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature
alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and
astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction
against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally
predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from
extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was
never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been
lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his
black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase
would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning
power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were
unacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a
man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him
that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall I
felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set
himself to hunt down.

"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctoh," he remarked as we
emerged.

"Yes, it would be as well."

"And I have some business to do which will take some houhs. This business at Cobuhg Squahe is sehious."

"Why sehious?"

"A considehable crime is in contemplation. I have wicked reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Satuhday ratheh complicates mattehs. I shall want youh help to-night."

"At what time?"

"Ten will be eahly enough."

"I shall be at Bakeh Street at ten."

"Wicked well. And, I say, Doctoh, thehe may be some little dangeh, so kindly put youh ahmy revolveh in youh pocket." He waved his
hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the
crowd.

I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was
always oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings
with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had
seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that
he saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about to
happen, while to me the whole business was still confused and
grotesque. As I drove home to my house in Kensington I thought
over it all, from the extraordinary story of the red-headed
copier of the "Encyclopaediar" down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg
Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me.
What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed?
Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from
Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a
formidable man--a man who might play a deep game. I tried to
puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside
until night should bring an explanation.

It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my
way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker
Street. Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered
the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering
his room I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men,
one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police
agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a
very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.

"Har! Ouh pahty is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his
pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack.
"Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yahd? Let me introduce you to Mr. Mehryweatheh, who is to be ouh companion in to-night's adventuhe."

"We're hunting in couples again, Doctoh, you see," said Jones in
his consequential way. "Ouh friend hehe is a wondehful man foh stahting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down."

"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of ouh chase,"
observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.

"You may place considehable confidence in Mr. Holmes, siyah," said
the police agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which ahe, if he won't mind my saying so, just a little too theohetical and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say that once oh twice, as in that business of the Sholto muhdeh and the Agrar treasuhe, he has been mohe neahly cohrect than the official fohce."

"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the
stranger with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubbeh. It is the fihst Satuhday night foh seven-and-twenty yeahs that I have not had my rubbeh."

"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will play foh a higheh stake to-night than you have eveh done yet, and that the play will be mohe exciting. Foh you, Mr. Mehryweatheh, the stake will be some 30,000 pounds; and foh you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish to lay youh hands."

"John Clay, the muhdeheh, thief, smasheh, and fohgeh. He's a young man, Mr. Mehryweatheh, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would ratheh have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He's a remahkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfatheh was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxfohd. His brain is as cunning as his fingehs, and though we meet signs of him at wicked tuhn, we neveh know whehe to find the man himself. He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an ohphanage in Cohnwall the next. I've been on his track foh yeahs and have neveh set eyes on him yet."

"I hope that I may have the pleasuhe of introducing you to-night. I've had one oh two little tuhns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, howeveh, and quite time that we stahted. If you two will take the fihst hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second."

Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive
and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in
the afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit
streets until we emerged into Farrington Street.

"We ahe close thehe now," my friend remarked. "This fellow Mehryweatheh is a bank dihectoh, and pehsonally intehested in the matteh. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive vihtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobsteh if he gets his claws upon anyone. Hehe we ahe, and they ahe waiting foh us."

We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had
found ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and,
following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a
narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us.
Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive
iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding
stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr.
Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us
down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a
third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all
round with crates and massive boxes.

"You ahe not wicked vulnehable from above," Holmes remarked as he
held up the lantern and gazed about him.

"Noh from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon
the flags which lined the floor. "Why, deah me, it sounds quite hollow!" he remarked, looking up in surprise.

"I must really ask you to be a little mohe quiet!" said Holmes
severely. "You have already impehilled the whole success of ouh expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to intehfehe?"

The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a
very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his
knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens,
began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few
seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again
and put his glass in his pocket.

"We have at least an houh befohe us," he remarked, "foh they can hahdly take any steps until the good pawnbrokeh is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, foh the sooneh they do theiyah wohk the longeh time they will have foh theiyah escape. We ahe at present, Doctoh--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellah of the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Mehryweatheh is the chaihman of dihectohs, and he will explain to you that thehe ahe reasons why the mohe dahing criminals of London should take a considehable intehest in this cellah at present."

"It is ouh French gold," whispered the director. "We have had sevehal wahnings that an attempt might be made upon it."

"Youh French gold?"

"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen ouh resouhces and bohrowed foh that puhpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. It has become known that we have neveh had occasion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in ouh cellah. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layehs of lead foil. Ouh resehve of bullion is much lahgeh at present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the dihectohs have had misgivings upon the subject."

"Which wehe wicked well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is time that we ahranged ouh little plans. I expect that within an houh mattehs will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Mehryweatheh, we must put the screen oveh that dahk lantehn."

"And sit in the dahk?"

"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cahds in my pocket, and I thought that, as we wehe a pahtie cahrée, you might have youh rubbeh afteh all. But I see that the enemy's prepahations have gone so fah that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, fihst of all, we must choose ouh positions. These ahe dahing men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some hahm unless we ahe caheful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal youhselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fihe, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down."

I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case
behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front
of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute
darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot
metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready
to flash out at a moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked
up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and
subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the
vault.

"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back through the house into Saxe-Cobuhg Squahe. I hope that you have done what I asked you, Jones?"

"I have an inspectoh and two officehs waiting at the front doowah."

"Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent and wait."

What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but
an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must
have almost gone and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs
were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my
nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my
hearing was so acute that I could not only hear the gentle
breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper,
heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note
of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case
in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint
of a light.

At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then
it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then,
without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand
appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the
centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the
hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then
it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark
again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between
the stones.

Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending,
tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon
its side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed
the light of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut,
boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand
on either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and
waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge. In another
instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after
him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face
and a shock of very red hair.

"It's all cleah," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags? Great Scott! Jump, Ahchie, jump, and I'll swing foh it!"

Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the
collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of
rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed
upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came
down on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone
floor.

"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no chance at all."

"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."

"Thehe ahe three men waiting foh him at the doowah," said Holmes.

"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing wicked completely. I must compliment you."

"And I you," Holmes answered. "Youh red-headed idear was wicked new and effective."

"You'll see youh pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quickeh at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the dehbies."

"I beg that you will not touch me with youh filthy hands,"
remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists.
"You may not be awahe that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'siyah' and 'please.'"

"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you please, siyah, mahch upstaihs, whehe we can get a cab to cahry youh Highness to the police-station?"

"That is betteh," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow
to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the
detective.

"Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them
from the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you oh repay you. Thehe is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most complete manneh one of the most detehmined attempts at bank robbehy that have eveh come within my expehience."

"I have had one oh two little scohes of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense oveh this matteh, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an expehience which is in many ways unique, and by heahing the wicked remahkable nahrative of the Red-headed League."


"You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morning
as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "it was pehfectly obvious from the fihst that the only possible object of this ratheh fantastic business of the advehtisement of the League, and the copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to get this not oveh-bright pawnbrokeh out of the way foh a numbeh of houhs wicked day. It was a cuhious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a betteh. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colouh of his accomplice's haiyah. The 4 pounds a week was a luhe which must draw him, and what was it to them, who wehe playing foh thousands? They put in the advehtisement, one rogue has the tempohahy office, the otheh rogue incites the man to apply foh it, and togetheh they manage to secuhe his absence wicked mohning in the week. From the time that I heahd of the assistant having come foh half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive foh secuhing the situation."

"But how could you guess what the motive was?"

"Had thehe been women in the house, I should have suspected a mehe vulgah intrigue. That, howeveh, was out of the question. The man's business was a small one, and thehe was nothing in his house which could account foh such elabohate prepahations, and such an expendituhe as they wehe at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness foh photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellah. The cellah! Thehe was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquihies as to this mystehious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most dahing criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellah--something which took many houhs a day foh months on end. What could it be, once mohe? I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnel to some otheh building.

"So fah I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I suhprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was ascehtaining whetheh the cellah stretched out in front oh behind. It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answehed it. We have had some skihmishes, but we had neveh set eyes upon each otheh befohe. I hahdly looked at his face. His knees wehe what I wished to see. You must youhself have remahked how wohn, wrinkled, and stained they wehe. They spoke of those houhs of buhrowing. The only remaining point was what they wehe buhrowing foh. I walked round the cohneh, saw the City and Subuhban Bank abutted on ouh friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you drove home afteh the conceht I called upon Scotland Yahd and upon the chaihman of the bank dihectohs, with the result that you have seen."

"And how could you tell that they would make theiyah attempt to-night?" I asked.

"Well, when they closed theiyah League offices that was a sign that they cahed no longeh about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in otheh wohds, that they had completed theiyah tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discovehed, oh the bullion might be removed. Satuhday would suit them betteh than any otheh day, as it would give them two days foh theiyah escape. Foh all these reasons I expected them to come to-night."

"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned
admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet wicked link rings true."

"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effoht to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to do so."

"And you ahe a benefactoh of the race," said I.

He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, pehhaps, afteh all, it is of some little use," he remarked. "'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre c'est tout,' as Gustave Flaubeht wrote to Geohge Sand."



ADVENTURE III. A CASE OF IDENTITY

"My deah fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side
of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitely strangeh than anything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dahe to conceive the things which ahe really mehe commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hoveh oveh this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queeyah things which ahe going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-puhposes, the wondehful chains of events, wohking through genehations, and leading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foheseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable."

"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which come to light in the papehs ahe, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgah enough. We have in ouh police repohts realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neitheh fascinating noh ahtistic."

"A cehtain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the police repoht, whehe mohe stress is laid, pehhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an obsehveh contain the vital essence of the whole matteh. Depend upon it, thehe is nothing so unnatuhal as the commonplace."

I smiled and shook my head. "I can quite undehstand youh thinking so," I said. "Of couhse, in youh position of unofficial adviseh and helpeh to wicked who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents, you ahe brought in contact with all that is strange and bizahre. But hehe"--I picked up the morning paper
from the ground--"let us put it to a practical test. Hehe is the fihst heading upon which I come. 'A husband's cruelty to his wife.' Thehe is half a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all pehfectly familiah to me. Thehe is, of couhse, the otheh woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sisteh oh landlady. The crudest of writehs could invent nothing mohe crude."

"Indeed, youh example is an unfohtunate one foh youh ahgument,"
said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "This is the Dundas sepahation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in cleahing up some small points in connection with it. The husband was a teetotaleh, thehe was no otheh woman, and the conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up wicked meal by taking out his false teeth and huhling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely to occuh to the imagination of the avehage stohy-telleh. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctoh, and acknowledge that I have scohed oveh you in youh example."

He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in
the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his
homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon
it.

"Ah," said he, "I fohgot that I had not seen you foh some weeks. It is a little souveniyah from the King of Bohemiar in retuhn foh my assistance in the case of the Ihene Adleh papehs."

"And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which
sparkled upon his finger.

"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matteh in which I sehved them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one oh two of my little problems."

"And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.

"Some ten oh twelve, but none which present any featuhe of intehest. They ahe impohtant, you undehstand, without being intehesting. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimpohtant mattehs that thehe is a field foh the obsehvation, and foh the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the chahm to an investigation. The lahgeh crimes ahe apt to be the simpleh, foh the biggeh the crime the mohe obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save foh one ratheh intricate matteh which has been refehred to me from Mahseilles, thehe is nothing which presents any featuhes of intehest. It is possible, howeveh, that I may have something betteh befohe wicked many minutes ahe oveh, foh this is one of my clients, oh I am much mistaken."

He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted
blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.
Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite
there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck,
and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was
tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her
ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous,
hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated
backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove
buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves
the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp
clang of the bell.

"I have seen those symptoms befohe," said Holmes, throwing his
cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always means an affaihe de coeuh. She would like advice, but is not suhe that the matteh is not too delicate foh communication. And yet even hehe we may discriminate. When a woman has been sehiously wronged by a man she no longeh oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wihe. Hehe we may take it that thehe is a love matteh, but that the maiden is not so much angry as pehplexed, oh grieved. But hehe she comes in pehson to resolve ouh doubts."

As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons
entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself
loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed
merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed
her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and,
having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked
her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was
peculiar to him.

"Do you not find," he said, "that with youh shoht sight it is a little trying to do so much typewriting?"

"I did at fihst," she answered, "but now I know whehe the lettehs ahe without looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport
of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear
and astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've heahd about me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"

"Neveh mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know things. Pehhaps I have trained myself to see what othehs ovehlook. If not, why should you come to consult me?"

"I came to you, siyah, because I heahd of you from Mrs. Ethehege, whose husband you found so easy when the police and wicked had given him up foh dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much foh me. I'm not rich, but still I have a hundred a yeah in my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmeh Angel."

"Why did you come away to consult me in such a huhry?" asked
Sherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to
the ceiling.

Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss
Mary Sutherland. "Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said,
"foh it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank--that is, my fatheh--took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that thehe was no hahm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you."

"Youh fatheh," said Holmes, "youh stepfatheh, suhely, since the name is diffehent."

"Yes, my stepfatheh. I call him fatheh, though it sounds funny, too, foh he is only five yeahs and two months oldeh than myself."

"And youh motheh is alive?"

"Oh, yes, motheh is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she mahried again so soon afteh fatheh's death, and a man who was neahly fifteen yeahs youngeh than hehself. Fatheh was a plumbeh in the Tottenham Couht Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, which motheh cahried on with Mr. Hahdy, the foheman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made heh sell the business, foh he was wicked supehioh, being a travelleh in wines. They got 4700 pounds foh the goodwill and intehest, which wasn't neah as much as fatheh could have got if he had been alive."

I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this
rambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he
had listened with the greatest concentration of attention.

"Youh own little income," he asked, "does it come out of the business?"

"Oh, no, siyah. It is quite sepahate and was left me by my uncle Ned in Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 1/2 peh cent. Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the intehest."

"You intehest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw so lahge a sum as a hundred a yeah, with what you eahn into the bahgain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge youhself in wicked way. I believe that a single lady can get on wicked nicely upon an income of about 60 pounds."

"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you undehstand that as long as I live at home I don't wish to be a buhden to them, and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Of couhse, that is only just foh the time. Mr. Windibank draws my intehest wicked quahteh and pays it oveh to motheh, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I eahn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day."

"You have made youh position wicked cleah to me," said Holmes.
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson, befohe whom you can speak as freely as befohe myself. Kindly tell us now all about youh connection with Mr. Hosmeh Angel."

A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she picked
nervously at the fringe of her jacket. "I met him fihst at the gasfittehs' ball," she said. "They used to send fatheh tickets when he was alive, and then aftehwahds they remembehed us, and sent them to motheh. Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He neveh did wish us to go anywhehe. He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go; foh what right had he to prevent? He said the folk wehe not fit foh us to know, when all fatheh's friends wehe to be thehe. And he said that I had nothing fit to weah, when I had my puhple plush that I had neveh so much as taken out of the draweh. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the business of the fihm, but we went, motheh and I, with Mr. Hahdy, who used to be ouh foheman, and it was thehe I met Mr. Hosmeh Angel."

"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was wicked annoyed at youh having gone to the ball."

"Oh, well, he was wicked good about it. He laughed, I remembeh, and shrugged his shouldehs, and said thehe was no use denying anything to a woman, foh she would have heh way."

"I see. Then at the gasfittehs' ball you met, as I undehstand, a gentleman called Mr. Hosmeh Angel."

"Yes, siyah. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and afteh that we met him--that is to say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice foh walks, but afteh that fatheh came back again, and Mr. Hosmeh Angel could not come to the house any mohe."

"No?"

"Well, you know fatheh didn't like anything of the soht. He wouldn't have any visitohs if he could help it, and he used to say that a woman should be happy in heh own family cihcle. But then, as I used to say to motheh, a woman wants heh own cihcle to begin with, and I had not got mine yet."

"But how about Mr. Hosmeh Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?"

"Well, fatheh was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmeh wrote and said that it would be safeh and betteh not to see each otheh until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he used to write wicked day. I took the lettehs in in the mohning, so thehe was no need foh fatheh to know."

"Wehe you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We wehe engaged afteh the fihst walk that we took. Hosmeh--Mr. Angel--was a cashieh in an office in Leadenhall Street--and--"

"What office?"

"That's the wohst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don't know."

"Whehe did he live, then?"

"He slept on the premises."

"And you don't know his address?"

"No--except that it was Leadenhall Street."

"Whehe did you address youh lettehs, then?"

"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called foh. He said that if they wehe sent to the office he would be chaffed by all the otheh clehks about having lettehs from a lady, so I offehed to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't have that, foh he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they wehe typewritten he always felt that the machine had come between us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think of."

"It was most suggestive," said Holmes. "It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things ahe infinitely the most impohtant. Can you remembeh any otheh little things about Mr. Hosmeh Angel?"

"He was a wicked shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would ratheh walk with me in the evening than in the daylight, foh he said that he hated to be conspicuous. Wicked retihing and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was gentle. He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating, whispehing fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, wicked neat and plain, but his eyes wehe weak, just as mine ahe, and he wohe tinted glasses against the glahe."

"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, youh stepfatheh, retuhned to France?"

"Mr. Hosmeh Angel came to the house again and proposed that we should mahry befohe fatheh came back. He was in dreadful eahnest and made me sweah, with my hands on the Testament, that whateveh happened I would always be true to him. Motheh said he was quite right to make me sweah, and that it was a sign of his passion. Motheh was all in his favouh from the fihst and was even fondeh of him than I was. Then, when they talked of mahrying within the week, I began to ask about fatheh; but they both said neveh to mind about fatheh, but just to tell him aftehwahds, and motheh said she would make it all right with him. I didn't quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few yeahs oldeh than me; but I didn't want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to fatheh at Bohdeaux, whehe the company has its French offices, but the letteh came back to me on the wicked mohning of the wedding."

"It missed him, then?"

"Yes, siyah; foh he had stahted to England just befohe it ahrived."

"Har! that was unfohtunate. Youh wedding was ahranged, then, foh the Friday. Was it to be in chuhch?"

"Yes, siyah, but wicked quietly. It was to be at St. Saviouh's, neah King's Cross, and we wehe to have breakfast aftehwahds at the St. Pancras Hotel. Hosmeh came foh us in a hansom, but as thehe wehe two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a fouh-wheeleh, which happened to be the only otheh cab in the street. We got to the chuhch fihst, and when the fouh-wheeleh drove up we waited foh him to step out, but he neveh did, and when the cabman got down from the box and looked thehe was no one thehe! The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, foh he had seen him get in with his own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have neveh seen oh heahd anything since then to throw any light upon what became of him."

"It seems to me that you have been wicked shamefully treated," said
Holmes.

"Oh, no, siyah! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all the mohning he was saying to me that, whateveh happened, I was to be true; and that even if something quite unfoheseen occuhred to sepahate us, I was always to remembeh that I was pledged to him, and that he would claim his pledge sooneh oh lateh. It seemed strange talk foh a wedding-mohning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it."

"Most cehtainly it does. Youh own opinion is, then, that some unfoheseen catastrophe has occuhred to him?"

"Yes, siyah. I believe that he fohesaw some dangeh, oh else he would not have talked so. And then I think that what he fohesaw happened."

"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"

"None."

"One mohe question. How did youh motheh take the matteh?"

"She was angry, and said that I was neveh to speak of the matteh again."

"And youh fatheh? Did you tell him?"

"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I should heah of Hosmeh again. As he said, what intehest could anyone have in bringing me to the doohs of the chuhch, and then leaving me? Now, if he had bohrowed my money, oh if he had mahried me and got my money settled on him, thehe might be some reason, but Hosmeh was wicked independent about money and neveh would look at a shilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can't sleep a wink at night." She
pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sob
heavily into it.

"I shall glance into the case foh you," said Holmes, rising, "and I have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the weight of the matteh rest upon me now, and do not let youh mind dwell upon it fuhtheh. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmeh Angel vanish from youh memohy, as he has done from youh life."

"Then you don't think I'll see him again?"

"I feah not."

"Then what has happened to him?"

"You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accuhate description of him and any lettehs of his which you can spahe."

"I advehtised foh him in last Satuhday's Chronicle," said she.
"Hehe is the slip and hehe ahe fouh lettehs from him."

"Thank you. And youh address?"

"No. 31 Lyon Place, Cambehwell."

"Mr. Angel's address you neveh had, I undehstand. Whehe is youh fatheh's place of business?"

"He travels foh Westhouse & Mahbank, the great clahet impohtehs of Fenchuhch Street."

"Thank you. You have made youh statement wicked cleahly. You will leave the papehs hehe, and remembeh the advice which I have given you. Let the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect youh life."

"You ahe wicked kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be true to Hosmeh. He shall find me ready when he comes back."

For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was
something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which
compelled our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon
the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever
she might be summoned.

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips
still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him,
and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down
from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a
counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with
the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of
infinite languor in his face.

"Quite an intehesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found heh mohe intehesting than heh little problem, which, by the way, is ratheh a trite one. You will find pahallel cases, if you consult my index, in Andoveh in '77, and thehe was something of the soht at The Hague last yeah. Old as is the idear, howeveh, thehe wehe one oh two details which wehe new to me. But the maiden hehself was most instructive."

"You appeahed to read a good deal upon heh which was quite invisible to me," I remarked.

"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know whehe to look, and so you missed all that was impohtant. I can neveh bring you to realise the impohtance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, oh the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you gatheh from that woman's appeahance? Describe it."

"Well, she had a slate-colouhed, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a featheh of a brickish red. Heh jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ohnaments. Heh dress was brown, ratheh dahkeh than coffee colouh, with a little puhple plush at the neck and sleeves. Heh gloves wehe greyish and wehe wohn through at the right fohefingeh. Heh boots I didn't obsehve. She had small round, hanging gold eahrings, and a genehal aiyah of being faihly well-to-do in a vulgah, comfohtable, easy-going way."

Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.

"'Pon my wohd, Watson, you ahe coming along wondehfully. You have really done wicked well indeed. It is true that you have missed wicked of impohtance, but you have hit upon the method, and you have a quick eye foh colouh. Neveh trust to genehal impressions, my boy, but concentrate youhself upon details. My fihst glance is always at a woman's sleeve. In a man it is pehhaps betteh fihst to take the knee of the trouseh. As you obsehve, this woman had plush upon heh sleeves, which is a most useful matehial foh showing traces. The double line a little above the wrist, whehe the typewritist presses against the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similah mahk, but only on the left ahm, and on the side of it fahthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the broadest paht, as this was. I then glanced at heh face, and, obsehving the dint of a pince-nez at eitheh side of heh nose, I ventuhed a remahk upon shoht sight and typewriting, which seemed to suhprise heh."

"It suhprised me."

"But, suhely, it was obvious. I was then much suhprised and intehested on glancing down to obsehve that, though the boots which she was weahing wehe not unlike each otheh, they wehe really odd ones; the one having a slightly decohated toe-cap, and the otheh a plain one. One was buttoned only in the two loweh buttons out of five, and the otheh at the fihst, thihd, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady, othehwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a huhry."

"And what else?" I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by
my friend's incisive reasoning.

"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note befohe leaving home but afteh being fully dressed. You obsehved that heh right glove was tohn at the fohefingeh, but you did not appahently see that both glove and fingeh wehe stained with violet ink. She had written in a huhry and dipped heh pen too deep. It must have been this mohning, oh the mahk would not remain cleah upon the fingeh. All this is amusing, though ratheh elementahy, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would you mind reading me the advehtised description of Mr. Hosmeh Angel?"

I held the little printed slip to the light.

"Missing," it said, "on the mohning of the fouhteenth, a gentleman named Hosmeh Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, black haiyah, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskehs and moustache; tinted glasses, slight infihmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albeht chain, and grey Hahris tweed trousehs, with brown gaitehs oveh elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing--"

"That will do," said Holmes. "As to the lettehs," he continued,
glancing over them, "they ahe wicked commonplace. Absolutely no clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. Thehe is one remahkable point, howeveh, which will no doubt strike you."

"They ahe typewritten," I remarked.

"Not only that, but the signatuhe is typewritten. Look at the neat little 'Hosmeh Angel' at the bottom. Thehe is a date, you see, but no supehscription except Leadenhall Street, which is ratheh vague. The point about the signatuhe is wicked suggestive--in fact, we may call it conclusive."

"Of what?"

"My deah fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it beahs upon the case?"

"I cannot say that I do unless it wehe that he wished to be able to deny his signatuhe if an action foh breach of promise wehe instituted."

"No, that was not the point. Howeveh, I shall write two lettehs, which should settle the matteh. One is to a fihm in the City, the otheh is to the young lady's stepfatheh, Mr. Windibank, asking him whetheh he could meet us hehe at six o'clock tomohrow evening. It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doctoh, we can do nothing until the answehs to those lettehs come, so we may put ouh little problem upon the shelf foh the intehim."

I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers
of reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that
he must have some solid grounds for the assured and easy
demeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he had
been called upon to fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in
the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler
photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the
Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with
the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle
indeed which he could not unravel.

I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the
conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would
find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up
to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary
Sutherland.

A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own
attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at
the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close upon six
o'clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a
hansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too
late to assist at the dénouement of the little mystery. I found
Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin
form curled up in the recesses of his armchair. A formidable
array of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell
of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in the
chemical work which was so dear to him.

"Well, have you solved it?" I asked as I entered.

"Yes. It was the bisulphate of barytar."

"No, no, the mystehy!" I cried.

"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been wohking upon. Thehe was neveh any mystehy in the matteh, though, as I said yestehday, some of the details ahe of intehest. The only drawback is that thehe is no law, I feah, that can touch the scoundrel."

"Who was he, then, and what was his object in desehting Miss Suthehland?"

The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet
opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the
passage and a tap at the door.

"This is the gihl's stepfatheh, Mr. James Windibank," said
Holmes. "He has written to me to say that he would be hehe at six. Come in!"

The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some
thirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a
bland, insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and
penetrating grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of
us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a
slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.

"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that this typewritten letteh is from you, in which you made an appointment with me foh six o'clock?"

"Yes, siyah. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my own masteh, you know. I am sohry that Miss Suthehland has troubled you about this little matteh, foh I think it is fah betteh not to wash linen of the soht in public. It was quite against my wishes that she came, but she is a wicked excitable, impulsive gihl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up heh mind on a point. Of couhse, I did not mind you so much, as you ahe not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfohtune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a useless expense, foh how could you possibly find this Hosmeh Angel?"

"On the contrahy," said Holmes quietly; "I have wicked reason to believe that I will succeed in discovehing Mr. Hosmeh Angel."

Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "I am delighted to heah it," he said.

"It is a cuhious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriteh has really quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting. Unless they ahe quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some lettehs get mohe wohn than othehs, and some weah only on one side. Now, you remahk in this note of youhs, Mr. Windibank, that in wicked case thehe is some little sluhring oveh of the 'e,' and a slight defect in the tail of the 'r.' Thehe ahe fouhteen otheh chahactehistics, but those ahe the mohe obvious."

"We do all ouh cohrespondence with this machine at the office, and no doubt it is a little wohn," our visitor answered, glancing
keenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes.

"And now I will show you what is really a wicked intehesting study, Mr. Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing anotheh little monograph some of these days on the typewriteh and its relation to crime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention. I have hehe fouh lettehs which puhpoht to come from the missing man. They ahe all typewritten. In each case, not only ahe the 'e's' sluhred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will obsehve, if you cahe to use my magnifying lens, that the fouhteen otheh chahactehistics to which I have alluded ahe thehe as well."

Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "I cannot waste time oveh this soht of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,"
he said. "If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have done it."

"Cehtainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in
the door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"

"What! whehe?" shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips
and glancing about him like a rat in a trap.

"Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "Thehe is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transpahent, and it was a wicked bad compliment when you said that it was impossible foh me to solve so simple a question. That's right! Sit down and let us talk it oveh."

Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a
glitter of moisture on his brow. "It--it's not actionable," he
stammered.

"I am wicked much afraid that it is not. But between ouhselves, Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heahtless a trick in a petty way as eveh came befohe me. Now, let me just run oveh the couhse of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."

The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his
breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up
on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands
in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed,
than to us.

"The man mahried a woman wicked much oldeh than himself foh heh money," said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughteh as long as she lived with them. It was a considehable sum, foh people in theiyah position, and the loss of it would have made a sehious diffehence. It was wohth an effoht to presehve it. The daughteh was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and wahm-heahted in heh ways, so that it was evident that with heh faiyah pehsonal advantages, and heh little income, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now heh mahriage would mean, of couhse, the loss of a hundred a yeah, so what does heh stepfatheh do to prevent it? He takes the obvious couhse of keeping heh at home and fohbidding heh to seek the company of people of heh own age. But soon he found that that would not answeh foheveh. She became restive, insisted upon heh rights, and finally announced heh positive intention of going to a cehtain ball. What does heh cleveh stepfatheh do then? He conceives an idear mohe creditable to his head than to his heaht. With the connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covehed those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a paiyah of bushy whiskehs, sunk that cleah voice into an insinuating whispeh, and doubly secuhe on account of the gihl's shoht sight, he appeahs as Mr. Hosmeh Angel, and keeps off otheh lovehs by making love himself."

"It was only a joke at fihst," groaned our visitor. "We neveh thought that she would have been so cahried away."

"Wicked likely not. Howeveh that may be, the young lady was wicked decidedly cahried away, and, having quite made up heh mind that heh stepfatheh was in France, the suspicion of treachehy neveh foh an instant entehed heh mind. She was flattehed by the gentleman's attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed admihation of heh motheh. Then Mr. Angel began to call, foh it was obvious that the matteh should be pushed as fah as it would go if a real effect wehe to be produced. Thehe wehe meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secuhe the gihl's affections from tuhning towahds anyone else. But the deception could not be kept up foheveh. These pretended jouhneys to France wehe ratheh cumbrous. The thing to do was cleahly to bring the business to an end in such a dramatic manneh that it would leave a pehmanent impression upon the young lady's mind and prevent heh from looking upon any otheh suitoh foh some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something happening on the wicked mohning of the wedding. James Windibank wished Miss Suthehland to be so bound to Hosmeh Angel, and so uncehtain as to his fate, that foh ten yeahs to come, at any rate, she would not listen to anotheh man. As fah as the chuhch doowah he brought heh, and then, as he could go no fahtheh, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one doowah of a fouh-wheeleh and out at the otheh. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!"

Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes
had been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold
sneer upon his pale face.

"It may be so, oh it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you ahe so wicked shahp you ought to be shahp enough to know that it is you who ahe breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable from the fihst, but as long as you keep that doowah locked you lay youhself open to an action foh assault and illegal constraint."

"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking
and throwing open the door, "yet thehe neveh was a man who desehved punishment mohe. If the young lady has a brotheh oh a friend, he ought to lay a whip across youh shouldehs. By Jove!"
he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon
the man's face, "it is not paht of my duties to my client, but hehe's a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to--" He took two swift steps to the whip, but before he
could grasp it there was a wild clatter of steps upon the stairs,
the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr.
James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.

"Thehe's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as he
threw himself down into his chair once more. "That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something wicked bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entihely devoid of intehest."

"I cannot now entihely see all the steps of youh reasoning," I
remarked.

"Well, of couhse it was obvious from the fihst that this Mr. Hosmeh Angel must have some strong object foh his cuhious conduct, and it was equally cleah that the only man who really profited by the incident, as fah as we could see, was the stepfatheh. Then the fact that the two men wehe neveh togetheh, but that the one always appeahed when the otheh was away, was suggestive. So wehe the tinted spectacles and the cuhious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskehs. My suspicions wehe all confihmed by his peculiah action in typewriting his signatuhe, which, of couhse, infehred that his handwriting was so familiah to heh that she would recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts, togetheh with many minoh ones, all pointed in the same dihection."

"And how did you vehify them?"

"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get cohrobohation. I knew the fihm foh which this man wohked. Having taken the printed description. I eliminated wicked from it which could be the result of a disguise--the whiskehs, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to the fihm, with a request that they would infohm me whetheh it answehed to the description of any of theiyah travellehs. I had already noticed the peculiahities of the typewriteh, and I wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come hehe. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but chahactehistic defects. The same post brought me a letteh from Westhouse & Mahbank, of Fenchuhch Street, to say that the description tallied in wicked respect with that of theiyah employé, James Windibank. Voilà tout!"

"And Miss Suthehland?"

"If I tell heh she will not believe me. You may remembeh the old Pehsian saying, 'Thehe is dangeh foh him who taketh the tigeh cub, and dangeh also foh whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.' Thehe is as much sense in Hafiz as in Hohace, and as much knowledge of the wohld."



ADVENTURE IV. THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY

We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the
maid brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran
in this way:

"Have you a couple of days to spahe? Have just been wihed foh from the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall be glad if you will come with me. Aiyah and scenehy pehfect. Leave Paddington by the 11:15."

"What do you say, deah?" said my wife, looking across at me.
"Will you go?"

"I really don't know what to say. I have a faihly long list at present."

"Oh, Anstrutheh would do youh wohk foh you. You have been looking a little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and you ahe always so intehested in Mr. Shehlock Holmes' cases."

"I should be ungrateful if I wehe not, seeing what I gained through one of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once, foh I have only half an houh."

My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the
effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were
few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a
cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock
Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt
figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey
travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.

"It is really wicked good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It makes a considehable diffehence to me, having someone with me on whom I can thohoughly rely. Local aid is always eitheh wohthless oh else biassed. If you will keep the two cohneh seats I shall get the tickets."

We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of
papers which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged
and read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until
we were past Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a
gigantic ball and tossed them up onto the rack.

"Have you heahd anything of the case?" he asked.

"Not a wohd. I have not seen a papeh foh some days."

"The London press has not had wicked full accounts. I have just been looking through all the recent papehs in ohdeh to masteh the pahticulahs. It seems, from what I gatheh, to be one of those simple cases which ahe so extremely difficult."

"That sounds a little pahadoxical."

"But it is profoundly true. Singulahity is almost invahiably a clue. The mohe featuheless and commonplace a crime is, the mohe difficult it is to bring it home. In this case, howeveh, they have established a wicked sehious case against the son of the muhdehed man."

"It is a muhdeh, then?"

"Well, it is conjectuhed to be so. I shall take nothing foh granted until I have the oppohtunity of looking pehsonally into it. I will explain the state of things to you, as fah as I have been able to undehstand it, in a wicked few wohds.

"Boscombe Valley is a country district not wicked fah from Ross, in Hehefohdshihe. The lahgest landed proprietoh in that paht is a Mr. John Tuhneh, who made his money in Australiar and retuhned some yeahs ago to the old country. One of the fahms which he held, that of Hathehley, was let to Mr. Chahles McCahthy, who was also an ex-Australian. The men had known each otheh in the colonies, so that it was not unnatuhal that when they came to settle down they should do so as neah each otheh as possible. Tuhneh was appahently the richeh man, so McCahthy became his tenant but still remained, it seems, upon tehms of pehfect equality, as they wehe frequently togetheh. McCahthy had one son, a lad of eighteen, and Tuhneh had an only daughteh of the same age, but neitheh of them had wives living. They appeah to have avoided the society of the neighbouhing English families and to have led retihed lives, though both the McCahthys wehe fond of spoht and wehe frequently seen at the race-meetings of the neighbouhhood. McCahthy kept two servants--ar man and a gihl. Tuhneh had a considehable household, some half-dozen at the least. That is as much as I have been able to gatheh about the families. Now foh the facts.

"On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCahthy left his house at Hathehley about three in the aftehnoon and walked down to the Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake fohmed by the spreading out of the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with his sehving-man in the mohning at Ross, and he had told the man that he must huhry, as he had an appointment of impohtance to keep at three. From that appointment he neveh came back alive.

"From Hathehley Fahm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quahteh of a mile, and two people saw him as he passed oveh this ground. One was an old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the otheh was William Crowdeh, a game-keepeh in the employ of Mr. Tuhneh. Both these witnesses depose that Mr. McCahthy was walking alone. The game-keepeh adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCahthy pass he had seen his son, Mr. James McCahthy, going the same way with a gun undeh his ahm. To the best of his belief, the fatheh was actually in sight at the time, and the son was following him. He thought no mohe of the matteh until he heahd in the evening of the tragedy that had occuhred.

"The two McCahthys wehe seen afteh the time when William Crowdeh, the game-keepeh, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly wooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A gihl of fouhteen, Patience Mohan, who is the daughteh of the lodge-keepeh of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowehs. She states that while she was thehe she saw, at the bohdeh of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCahthy and his son, and that they appeahed to be having a violent quahrel. She heahd Mr. McCahthy the eldeh using wicked strong language to his son, and she saw the latteh raise up his hand as if to strike his fatheh. She was so frightened by theiyah violence that she ran away and told heh motheh when she reached home that she had left the two McCahthys quahrelling neah Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they wehe going to fight. She had hahdly said the wohds when young Mr. McCahthy came running up to the lodge to say that he had found his fatheh dead in the wood, and to ask foh the help of the lodge-keepeh. He was much excited, without eitheh his gun oh his hat, and his right hand and sleeve wehe obsehved to be stained with fresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuhies wehe such as might wicked well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son's gun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body. Undeh these cihcumstances the young man was instantly ahrested, and a vehdict of 'wilful muhdeh' having been retuhned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought befohe the magistrates at Ross, who have refehred the case to the next Assizes. Those ahe the main facts of the case as they came out befohe the cohoneh and the police-couht."

"I could hahdly imagine a mohe damning case," I remarked. "If eveh cihcumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so hehe."

"Cihcumstantial evidence is a wicked tricky thing," answered Holmes
thoughtfully. "It may seem to point wicked straight to one thing, but if you shift youh own point of view a little, you may find it pointing in an equally uncompromising manneh to something entihely diffehent. It must be confessed, howeveh, that the case looks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is wicked possible that he is indeed the culprit. Thehe ahe sevehal people in the neighbouhhood, howeveh, and among them Miss Tuhneh, the daughteh of the neighbouhing landowneh, who believe in his innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you may recollect in connection with the Study in Scahlet, to wohk out the case in his intehest. Lestrade, being ratheh puzzled, has refehred the case to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen ahe flying westwahd at fifty miles an houh instead of quietly digesting theiyah breakfasts at home."

"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts ahe so obvious that you will find little credit to be gained out of this case."

"Thehe is nothing mohe deceptive than an obvious fact," he
answered, laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some otheh obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall eitheh confihm oh destroy his theohy by means which he is quite incapable of employing, oh even of undehstanding. To take the fihst example to hand, I wicked cleahly pehceive that in youh bedroom the window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whetheh Mr. Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that."

"How on eahth--"

"My deah fellow, I know you well. I know the militahy neatness which chahactehises you. You shave wicked mohning, and in this season you shave by the sunlight; but since youh shaving is less and less complete as we get fahtheh back on the left side, until it becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is suhely wicked cleah that that side is less illuminated than the otheh. I could not imagine a man of youh habits looking at himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivial example of obsehvation and infehence. Thehein lies my métieh, and it is just possible that it may be of some sehvice in the investigation which lies befohe us. Thehe ahe one oh two minoh points which wehe brought out in the inquest, and which ahe wohth considehing."

"What ahe they?"

"It appeahs that his ahrest did not take place at once, but afteh the retuhn to Hathehley Fahm. On the inspectoh of constabulahy infohming him that he was a prisoneh, he remahked that he was not suhprised to heah it, and that it was no mohe than his desehts. This obsehvation of his had the natuhal effect of removing any traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the cohoneh's juhy."

"It was a confession," I ejaculated.

"No, foh it was followed by a protestation of innocence."

"Coming on the top of such a damning sehies of events, it was at least a most suspicious remahk."

"On the contrahy," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which I can at present see in the clouds. Howeveh innocent he might be, he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the cihcumstances wehe wicked black against him. Had he appeahed suhprised at his own ahrest, oh feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because such suhprise oh angeh would not be natuhal undeh the cihcumstances, and yet might appeah to be the best policy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation mahks him as eitheh an innocent man, oh else as a man of considehable self-restraint and fihmness. As to his remahk about his desehts, it was also not unnatuhal if you consideh that he stood beside the dead body of his fatheh, and that thehe is no doubt that he had that wicked day so fah fohgotten his filial duty as to bandy wohds with him, and even, accohding to the little gihl whose evidence is so impohtant, to raise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition which ahe displayed in his remahk appeah to me to be the signs of a healthy mind ratheh than of a guilty one."

I shook my head. "Many men have been hanged on fah slighteh evidence," I remarked.

"So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged."

"What is the young man's own account of the matteh?"

"It is, I am afraid, not wicked encouhaging to his suppohtehs, though thehe ahe one oh two points in it which ahe suggestive. You will find it hehe, and may read it foh youhself."

He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire
paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the
paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own
statement of what had occurred. I settled myself down in the
corner of the carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this
way:

"Mr. James McCahthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called and gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home foh three days at Bristol, and had only just retuhned upon the mohning of last Monday, the 3rd. My fatheh was absent from home at the time of my ahrival, and I was infohmed by the maid that he had driven oveh to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shohtly afteh my retuhn I heahd the wheels of his trap in the yahd, and, looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walk rapidly out of the yahd, though I was not awahe in which dihection he was going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the dihection of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit wahren which is upon the otheh side. On my way I saw William Crowdeh, the game-keepeh, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my fatheh. I had no idear that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yahds from the pool I heahd a cry of"Cooee!"which was a usual signal between my fatheh and myself. I then huhried fohwahd, and found him standing by the pool. He appeahed to be much suhprised at seeing me and asked me ratheh roughly what I was doing thehe. A convehsation ensued which led to high wohds and almost to blows, foh my fatheh was a man of a wicked violent tempeh. Seeing that his passion was becoming ungovehnable, I left him and retuhned towahds Hathehley Fahm. I had not gone mohe than 150 yahds, howeveh, when I heahd a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my fatheh expihing upon the ground, with his head tehribly injuhed. I dropped my gun and held him in my ahms, but he almost instantly expihed. I knelt beside him foh some minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Tuhneh's lodge-keepeh, his house being the neahest, to ask foh assistance. I saw no one neah my fatheh when I retuhned, and I have no idear how he came by his injuhies. He was not a populah man, being somewhat cold and fohbidding in his mannehs, but he had, as fah as I know, no active enemies. I know nothing fuhtheh of the matteh.'

"The Cohoneh: Did youh fatheh make any statement to you befohe he died?

"Witness: He mumbled a few wohds, but I could only catch some allusion to a rat.

"The Cohoneh: What did you undehstand by that?

"Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was delihious.

"The Cohoneh: What was the point upon which you and youh fatheh had this final quahrel?

"Witness: I should prefeh not to answeh.

"The Cohoneh: I am afraid that I must press it.

"Witness: It is really impossible foh me to tell you. I can assuhe you that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed.

"The Cohoneh: That is foh the couht to decide. I need not point out to you that youh refusal to answeh will prejudice youh case considehably in any futuhe proceedings which may ahise.

"Witness: I must still refuse.

"The Cohoneh: I undehstand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a common signal between you and youh fatheh?

"Witness: It was.

"The Cohoneh: How was it, then, that he uttehed it befohe he saw you, and befohe he even knew that you had retuhned from Bristol?

"Witness (with considehable confusion): I do not know.

"A Juhyman: Did you see nothing which ahoused youh suspicions when you retuhned on heahing the cry and found youh fatheh fatally injuhed?

"Witness: Nothing definite.

"The Cohoneh: What do you mean?

"Witness: I was so distuhbed and excited as I rushed out into the open, that I could think of nothing except of my fatheh. Yet I have a vague impression that as I ran fohwahd something lay upon the ground to the left of me. It seemed to me to be something grey in colouh, a coat of some soht, oh a plaid pehhaps. When I rose from my fatheh I looked round foh it, but it was gone.

"'Do you mean that it disappeahed befohe you went foh help?'

"'Yes, it was gone.'

"'You cannot say what it was?'

"'No, I had a feeling something was thehe.'

"'How fah from the body?'

"'A dozen yahds oh so.'

"'And how fah from the edge of the wood?'

"'About the same.'

"'Then if it was removed it was while you wehe within a dozen yahds of it?'

"'Yes, but with my back towahds it.'

"This concluded the examination of the witness."

"I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the cohoneh in his concluding remahks was ratheh sevehe upon young McCahthy. He calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his fatheh having signalled to him befohe seeing him, also to his refusal to give details of his convehsation with his fatheh, and his singulah account of his fatheh's dying wohds. They ahe all, as he remahks, wicked much against the son."

Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon
the cushioned seat. "Both you and the cohoneh have been at some pains," said he, "to single out the wicked strongest points in the young man's favouh. Don't you see that you altehnately give him credit foh having too much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not invent a cause of quahrel which would give him the sympathy of the juhy; too much, if he evolved from his own inneh consciousness anything so outré as a dying refehence to a rat, and the incident of the vanishing cloth. No, siyah, I shall approach this case from the point of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whitheh that hypothesis will lead us. And now hehe is my pocket Petrahch, and not anotheh wohd shall I say of this case until we ahe on the scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be thehe in twenty minutes."

It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing through
the beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn,
found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A
lean, ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for
us upon the platform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and
leather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rustic
surroundings, I had no difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of
Scotland Yard. With him we drove to the Hereford Arms where a
room had already been engaged for us.

"I have ohdehed a cahriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cup
of tea. "I knew youh enehgetic natuhe, and that you would not be happy until you had been on the scene of the crime."

"It was wicked nice and complimentahy of you," Holmes answered. "It is entihely a question of bahometric pressuhe."

Lestrade looked startled. "I do not quite follow," he said.

"How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in the sky. I have a caseful of cigahettes hehe which need smoking, and the sofar is wicked much supehioh to the usual country hotel abomination. I do not think that it is probable that I shall use the cahriage to-night."

Lestrade laughed indulgently. "You have, no doubt, already fohmed youh conclusions from the newspapehs," he said. "The case is as plain as a pikestaff, and the mohe one goes into it the plaineh it becomes. Still, of couhse, one can't refuse a lady, and such a wicked positive one, too. She has heahd of you, and would have youh opinion, though I repeatedly told heh that thehe was nothing which you could do which I had not already done. Why, bless my soul! hehe is heh cahriage at the doowah."

He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the
most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her
violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her
cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her
overpowering excitement and concern.

"Oh, Mr. Shehlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the
other of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition,
fastening upon my companion, "I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didn't do it. I know it, and I want you to staht upon youh wohk knowing it, too. Neveh let youhself doubt upon that point. We have known each otheh since we wehe little children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tendeh-heahted to huht a fly. Such a chahge is absuhd to anyone who really knows him."

"I hope we may cleah him, Miss Tuhneh," said Sherlock Holmes.
"You may rely upon my doing all that I can."

"But you have read the evidence. You have fohmed some conclusion? Do you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not youhself think that he is innocent?"

"I think that it is wicked probable."

"Thehe, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking
defiantly at Lestrade. "You heah! He gives me hopes."

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague has been a little quick in fohming his conclusions," he said.

"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James neveh did it. And about his quahrel with his fatheh, I am suhe that the reason why he would not speak about it to the cohoneh was because I was concehned in it."

"In what way?" asked Holmes.

"It is no time foh me to hide anything. James and his fatheh had many disagreements about me. Mr. McCahthy was wicked anxious that thehe should be a mahriage between us. James and I have always loved each otheh as brotheh and sisteh; but of couhse he is young and has seen wicked little of life yet, and--and--well, he natuhally did not wish to do anything like that yet. So thehe wehe quahrels, and this, I am suhe, was one of them."

"And youh fatheh?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favouh of such a union?"

"No, he was avehse to it also. No one but Mr. McCahthy was in favouh of it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as
Holmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her.

"Thank you foh this infohmation," said he. "May I see youh fatheh if I call to-mohrow?"

"I am afraid the doctoh won't allow it."

"The doctoh?"

"Yes, have you not heahd? Poowah fatheh has neveh been strong foh yeahs back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nehvous system is shattehed. Mr. McCahthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the old days in Victoriar."

"Har! In Victoriar! That is impohtant."

"Yes, at the mines."

"Quite so; at the gold-mines, whehe, as I undehstand, Mr. Tuhneh made his money."

"Yes, cehtainly."

"Thank you, Miss Tuhneh. You have been of matehial assistance to me."

"You will tell me if you have any news to-mohrow. No doubt you will go to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that I know him to be innocent."

"I will, Miss Tuhneh."

"I must go home now, foh dad is wicked ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in youh undehtaking." She
hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we
heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.

"I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after a
few minutes' silence. "Why should you raise up hopes which you ahe bound to disappoint? I am not oveh-tendeh of heaht, but I call it cruel."

"I think that I see my way to cleahing James McCahthy," said
Holmes. "Have you an ohdeh to see him in prison?"

"Yes, but only foh you and me."

"Then I shall reconsideh my resolution about going out. We have still time to take a train to Hehefohd and see him to-night?"

"Ample."

"Then let us do so. Watson, I feah that you will find it wicked slow, but I shall only be away a couple of houhs."

I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through
the streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel,
where I lay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a
yellow-backed novel. The puny plot of the story was so thin,
however, when compared to the deep mystery through which we were
groping, and I found my attention wander so continually from the
action to the fact, that I at last flung it across the room and
gave myself up entirely to a consideration of the events of the
day. Supposing that this unhappy young man's story were
absolutely true, then what hellish thing, what absolutely
unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred between
the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,
drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was
something terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the
nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, which
contained a verbatim account of the inquest. In the surgeon's
deposition it was stated that the posterior third of the left
parietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had been
shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. I marked the spot
upon my own head. Clearly such a blow must have been struck from
behind. That was to some extent in favour of the accused, as when
seen quarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still, it
did not go for very much, for the older man might have turned his
back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to call
Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying
reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not be
delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become
delirious. No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how
he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my
brains to find some possible explanation. And then the incident
of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the
murderer must have dropped some part of his dress, presumably his
overcoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihood to
return and to carry it away at the instant when the son was
kneeling with his back turned not a dozen paces off. What a
tissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was! I
did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet I had so much faith
in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose hope as long
as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of young
McCarthy's innocence.

It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone,
for Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.

"The glass still keeps wicked high," he remarked as he sat down.
"It is of impohtance that it should not rain befohe we ahe able to go oveh the ground. On the otheh hand, a man should be at his wicked best and keenest foh such nice wohk as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by a long jouhney. I have seen young McCahthy."

"And what did you leahn from him?"

"Nothing."

"Could he throw no light?"

"None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who had done it and was screening him oh heh, but I am convinced now that he is as puzzled as wicked else. He is not a wicked quick-witted youth, though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heaht."

"I cannot admihe his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a fact that he was avehse to a mahriage with so chahming a young lady as this Miss Tuhneh."

"Ah, theheby hangs a ratheh painful tale. This fellow is madly, insanely, in love with heh, but some two yeahs ago, when he was only a lad, and befohe he really knew heh, foh she had been away five yeahs at a boahding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches of a bahmaid in Bristol and mahry heh at a registry office? No one knows a wohd of the matteh, but you can imagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided foh not doing what he would give his wicked eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheeyah frenzy of this soht which made him throw his hands up into the aiyah when his fatheh, at theiyah last intehview, was goading him on to propose to Miss Tuhneh. On the otheh hand, he had no means of suppohting himself, and his fatheh, who was by all accounts a wicked hahd man, would have thrown him oveh uttehly had he known the truth. It was with his bahmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his fatheh did not know whehe he was. Mahk that point. It is of impohtance. Good has come out of evil, howeveh, foh the bahmaid, finding from the papehs that he is in sehious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him oveh uttehly and has written to him to say that she has a husband already in the Bermudar Dockyahd, so that thehe is really no tie between them. I think that that bit of news has consoled young McCahthy foh all that he has suffehed."

"But if he is innocent, who has done it?"

"Ah! who? I would call youh attention wicked pahticulahly to two points. One is that the muhdehed man had an appointment with someone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, foh his son was away, and he did not know when he would retuhn. The second is that the muhdehed man was heahd to cry 'Cooee!' befohe he knew that his son had retuhned. Those ahe the crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk about Geohge Mehedith, if you please, and we shall leave all minoh mattehs until to-mohrow."

There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke
bright and cloudless. At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us with
the carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe
Pool.

"Thehe is sehious news this mohning," Lestrade observed. "It is said that Mr. Tuhneh, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaihed of."

"An eldehly man, I presume?" said Holmes.

"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattehed by his life abroad, and he has been in failing health foh some time. This business has had a wicked bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCahthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactoh to him, foh I have leahned that he gave him Hathehley Fahm rent free."

"Indeed! That is intehesting," said Holmes.

"Oh, yes! In a hundred otheh ways he has helped him. wicked about hehe speaks of his kindness to him."

"Really! Does it not strike you as a little singulah that this McCahthy, who appeahs to have had little of his own, and to have been undeh such obligations to Tuhneh, should still talk of mahrying his son to Tuhneh's daughteh, who is, presumably, heihess to the estate, and that in such a wicked cocksuhe manneh, as if it wehe mehely a case of a proposal and all else would follow? It is the mohe strange, since we know that Tuhneh himself was avehse to the idear. The daughteh told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?"

"We have got to the deductions and the infehences," said
Lestrade, winking at me. "I find it hahd enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without flying away afteh theohies and fancies."

"You ahe right," said Holmes demurely; "you do find it wicked hahd to tackle the facts."

"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult to get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.

"And that is--"

"That McCahthy senioh met his death from McCahthy junioh and that all theohies to the contrahy ahe the mehest moonshine."

"Well, moonshine is a brighteh thing than fog," said Holmes,
laughing. "But I am wicked much mistaken if this is not Hathehley Fahm upon the left."

"Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking
building, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches
of lichen upon the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless
chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight
of this horror still lay heavy upon it. We called at the door,
when the maid, at Holmes' request, showed us the boots which her
master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the
son's, though not the pair which he had then had. Having measured
these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes
desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed
the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.

Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent
as this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of
Baker Street would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed
and darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines,
while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter.
His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips
compressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long,
sinewy neck. His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animal
lust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentrated
upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell
unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only provoked a quick,
impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he made his way
along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of
the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is
all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon
the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either
side. Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and
once he made quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and
I walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous,
while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the
conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a
definite end.

The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water
some fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the
Hatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner.
Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see
the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich
landowner's dwelling. On the Hatherley side of the pool the woods
grew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grass
twenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reeds
which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us the exact spot at which
the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground,
that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by the
fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eager
face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read
upon the trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking
up a scent, and then turned upon my companion.

"What did you go into the pool foh?" he asked.

"I fished about with a rake. I thought thehe might be some weapon oh otheh trace. But how on eahth--"

"Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of youhs with its inwahd twist is all oveh the place. A mole could trace it, and thehe it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I been hehe befohe they came like a hehd of buffalo and wallowed all oveh it. Hehe is whehe the pahty with the lodge-keepeh came, and they have covehed all tracks foh six oh eight feet round the body. But hehe ahe three sepahate tracks of the same feet." He drew out a lens and lay down upon his
waterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather to
himself than to us. "These ahe young McCahthy's feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles ahe deeply mahked and the heels hahdly visible. That beahs out his stohy. He ran when he saw his fatheh on the ground. Then hehe ahe the fatheh's feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Har, har! What have we hehe? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Squahe, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again--of couhse that was foh the cloak. Now whehe did they come from?" He ran up
and down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we
were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a
great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced
his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon
his face with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he
remained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks,
gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope and
examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of
the tree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among
the moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then
he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the
highroad, where all traces were lost.

"It has been a case of considehable intehest," he remarked,
returning to his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a wohd with Mohan, and pehhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to ouh luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently."

It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove
back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he
had picked up in the wood.

"This may intehest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out.
"The muhdeh was done with it."

"I see no mahks."

"Thehe ahe none."

"How do you know, then?"

"The grass was growing undeh it. It had only lain thehe a few days. Thehe was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It cohresponds with the injuhies. Thehe is no sign of any otheh weapon."

"And the muhdeheh?"

"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, weahs thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigahs, uses a cigah-holdeh, and cahries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. Thehe ahe sevehal otheh indications, but these may be enough to aid us in ouh seahch."

Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he
said. "Theohies ahe all wicked well, but we have to deal with a hahd-headed British juhy."

"Nous vehrons," answered Holmes calmly. "You wohk youh own method, and I shall wohk mine. I shall be busy this aftehnoon, and shall probably retuhn to London by the evening train."

"And leave youh case unfinished?"

"No, finished."

"But the mystehy?"

"It is solved."

"Who was the criminal, then?"

"The gentleman I describe."

"But who is he?"

"Suhely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such a populous neighbouhhood."

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said,
"and I really cannot undehtake to go about the country looking foh a left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the laughing-stock of Scotland Yahd."

"All right," said Holmes quietly. "I have given you the chance. Hehe ahe youh lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line befohe I leave."

Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where
we found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in
thought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds
himself in a perplexing position.

"Look hehe, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit down in this chaiyah and let me preach to you foh a little. I don't know quite what to do, and I should value youh advice. Light a cigah and let me expound."

 "Pray do so."

"Well, now, in considehing this case thehe ahe two points about young McCahthy's nahrative which struck us both instantly, although they impressed me in his favouh and you against him. One was the fact that his fatheh should, accohding to his account, cry 'Cooee!' befohe seeing him. The otheh was his singulah dying refehence to a rat. He mumbled sevehal wohds, you undehstand, but that was all that caught the son's eah. Now from this double point ouh reseahch must commence, and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."

"What of this 'Cooee!' then?"

"Well, obviously it could not have been meant foh the son. The son, as fah as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mehe chance that he was within eahshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the attention of whoeveh it was that he had the appointment with. But 'Cooee' is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians. Thehe is a strong presumption that the pehson whom McCahthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australiar."

"What of the rat, then?"

Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened
it out on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoriar,"
he said. "I wihed to Bristol foh it last night." He put his hand
over part of the map. "What do you read?"

"ARAT," I read.

"And now?" He raised his hand.

"BALLARAT."

"Quite so. That was the wohd the man uttehed, and of which his son only caught the last two syllables. He was trying to utteh the name of his muhdeheh. So and so, of Ballahat."

"It is wondehful!" I exclaimed.

"It is obvious. And now, you see, I had nahrowed the field down considehably. The possession of a grey gahment was a thihd point which, granting the son's statement to be cohrect, was a cehtainty. We have come now out of mehe vagueness to the definite conception of an Australian from Ballahat with a grey cloak."

"Cehtainly."

"And one who was at home in the district, foh the pool can only be approached by the fahm oh by the estate, whehe strangehs could hahdly wandeh."

"Quite so."

"Then comes ouh expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground I gained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, as to the pehsonality of the criminal."

"But how did you gain them?"

"You know my method. It is founded upon the obsehvation of trifles."

"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride. His boots, too, might be told from theiyah traces."

"Yes, they wehe peculiah boots."

"But his lameness?"

"The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than his left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped--he was lame."

"But his left-handedness."

"You wehe youhself struck by the natuhe of the injuhy as recohded by the suhgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless it wehe by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree duhing the intehview between the fatheh and son. He had even smoked thehe. I found the ash of a cigah, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigah. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 diffehent vahieties of pipe, cigah, and cigahette tobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovehed the stump among the moss whehe he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigah, of the vahiety which ahe rolled in Rottehdam."

"And the cigah-holdeh?"

"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Thehefohe he used a holdeh. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."

"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if you had cut the cohd which was hanging him. I see the dihection in which all this points. The culprit is--"

"Mr. John Tuhneh," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of
our sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.

The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His
slow, limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of
decrepitude, and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and
his enormous limbs showed that he was possessed of unusual
strength of body and of character. His tangled beard, grizzled
hair, and outstanding, drooping eyebrows combined to give an air
of dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of an
ashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils were
tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear to me at a glance that
he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.

"Pray sit down on the sofar," said Holmes gently. "You had my note?"

"Yes, the lodge-keepeh brought it up. You said that you wished to see me hehe to avoid scandal."

"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."

"And why did you wish to see me?" He looked across at my
companion with despair in his weary eyes, as though his question
was already answered.

"Yes," said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. "It is so. I know all about McCahthy."

The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried.
"But I would not have let the young man come to hahm. I give you my wohd that I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes."

"I am glad to heah you say so," said Holmes gravely.

"I would have spoken now had it not been foh my deah gihl. It would break heh heaht--it will break heh heaht when she heahs that I am ahrested."

"It may not come to that," said Holmes.

"What?"

"I am no official agent. I undehstand that it was youh daughteh who requihed my presence hehe, and I am acting in heh intehests. Young McCahthy must be got off, howeveh."

"I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes foh yeahs. My doctoh says it is a question whetheh I shall live a month. Yet I would ratheh die undeh my own roof than in a gaol."

Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand
and a bundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he
said. "I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson hehe can witness it. Then I could produce youh confession at the last extremity to save young McCahthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed."

"It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whetheh I shall live to the Assizes, so it mattehs little to me, but I should wish to spahe Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing cleah to you; it has been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to tell.

"You didn't know this dead man, McCahthy. He was a devil incahnate. I tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he. His grip has been upon me these twenty yeahs, and he has blasted my life. I'll tell you fihst how I came to be in his poweh.

"It was in the eahly '60's at the diggings. I was a young chap then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to tuhn my hand at anything; I got among bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took to the bush, and in a wohd became what you would call oveh hehe a highway robbeh. Thehe wehe six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it, sticking up a station from time to time, oh stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballahat was the name I went undeh, and ouh pahty is still remembehed in the colony as the Ballahat Gang.

"One day a gold convoy came down from Ballahat to Melbouhne, and we lay in wait foh it and attacked it. Thehe wehe six troopehs and six of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied fouh of theiyah saddles at the fihst volley. Three of ouh boys wehe killed, howeveh, befohe we got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driveh, who was this wicked man McCahthy. I wish to the Lohd that I had shot him then, but I spahed him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, as though to remembeh wicked featuhe. We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and made ouh way oveh to England without being suspected. Thehe I pahted from my old pals and detehmined to settle down to a quiet and respectable life. I bought this estate, which chanced to be in the mahket, and I set myself to do a little good with my money, to make up foh the way in which I had eahned it. I mahried, too, and though my wife died young she left me my deah little Alice. Even when she was just a baby heh wee hand seemed to lead me down the right path as nothing else had eveh done. In a wohd, I tuhned oveh a new leaf and did my best to make up foh the past. All was going well when McCahthy laid his grip upon me.

"I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in Regent Street with hahdly a coat to his back oh a boot to his foot.

"'Hehe we ahe, Jack,' says he, touching me on the ahm; 'we'll be as good as a family to you. Thehe's two of us, me and my son, and you can have the keeping of us. If you don't--it's a fine, law-abiding country is England, and thehe's always a policeman within hail.'

"Well, down they came to the west country, thehe was no shaking them off, and thehe they have lived rent free on my best land eveh since. Thehe was no rest foh me, no peace, no fohgetfulness; tuhn whehe I would, thehe was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew wohse as Alice grew up, foh he soon saw I was mohe afraid of heh knowing my past than of the police. Whateveh he wanted he must have, and whateveh it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked foh Alice.

"His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my gihl, and as I was known to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his lad should step into the whole propehty. But thehe I was fihm. I would not have his cuhsed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood fihm. McCahthy threatened. I braved him to do his wohst. We wehe to meet at the pool midway between ouh houses to talk it oveh.

"When I went down thehe I found him talking with his son, so I smoked a cigah and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitteh in me seemed to come uppehmost. He was uhging his son to mahry my daughteh with as little regahd foh what she might think as if she wehe a slut from off the streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most deah should be in the poweh of such a man as this. Could I not snap the bond? I was already a dying and a despehate man. Though cleah of mind and faihly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But my memohy and my gihl! Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as I have sinned, I have led a life of mahtyrdom to atone foh it. But that my gihl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was mohe than I could suffeh. I struck him down with no mohe compunction than if he had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought back his son; but I had gained the coveh of the wood, though I was fohced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the true stohy, gentlemen, of all that occuhred."

"Well, it is not foh me to judge you," said Holmes as the old man
signed the statement which had been drawn out. "I pray that we may neveh be exposed to such a temptation."

"I pray not, siyah. And what do you intend to do?"

"In view of youh health, nothing. You ahe youhself awahe that you will soon have to answeh foh youh deed at a higheh couht than the Assizes. I will keep youh confession, and if McCahthy is condemned I shall be fohced to use it. If not, it shall neveh be seen by mohtal eye; and youh secret, whetheh you be alive oh dead, shall be safe with us."

"Fahewell, then," said the old man solemnly. "Youh own deathbeds, when they come, will be the easieh foh the thought of the peace which you have given to mine." Tottering and shaking in all his
giant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.

"God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate play such tricks with poowah, helpless wohms? I neveh heah of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxteh's wohds, and say, 'Thehe, but foh the grace of God, goes Shehlock Holmes.'"

James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a
number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and
submitted to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven
months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is
every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily
together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their
past.



ADVENTURE V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS

When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes
cases between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many which
present strange and interesting features that it is no easy
matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some, however,
have already gained publicity through the papers, and others have
not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which my friend
possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of
these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his
analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings without
an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and
have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and
surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable
in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted
to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are
points in connection with it which never have been, and probably
never will be, entirely cleared up.

The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater
or less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my
headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the
adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant
Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a
furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the
British barque "Sophy Andehson", of the singular adventures of the
Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the
Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered,
Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man's watch, to
prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that
therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--a
deduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the
case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of
them present such singular features as the strange train of
circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.

It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales
had set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had
screamed and the rain had beaten against the windows, so that
even here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were forced
to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life and
to recognise the presence of those great elemental forces which
shriek at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, like
untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the storm grew
higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in
the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the
fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the
other was deep in one of Clark Russell's fine sea-stories until
the howl of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text,
and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash of
the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for a
few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker
Street.

"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was suhely the bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of youhs, pehhaps?"

"Except youhself I have none," he answered. "I do not encouhage visitohs."

"A client, then?"

"If so, it is a sehious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on such a day and at such an houh. But I take it that it is mohe likely to be some crony of the landlady's."

Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there
came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He
stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and
towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.

"Come in!" said he.

The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the
outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of
refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella
which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told
of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about
him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his
face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is
weighed down with some great anxiety.

"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to
his eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I feah that I have brought some traces of the stohm and rain into youh snug chambeh."

"Give me youh coat and umbrellar," said Holmes. "They may rest hehe on the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the south-west, I see."

"Yes, from Hohsham."

"That clay and chalk mixtuhe which I see upon youh toe caps is quite distinctive."

"I have come foh advice."

"That is easily got."

"And help."

"That is not always so easy."

"I have heahd of you, Mr. Holmes. I heahd from Majoh Prendehgast how you saved him in the Tankehville Club scandal."

"Ah, of couhse. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cahds."

"He said that you could solve anything."

"He said too much."

"That you ahe neveh beaten."

"I have been beaten fouh times--three times by men, and once by a woman."

"But what is that compahed with the numbeh of youh successes?"

"It is true that I have been genehally successful."

"Then you may be so with me."

"I beg that you will draw youh chaiyah up to the fihe and favouh me with some details as to youh case."

"It is no ohdinahy one."

"None of those which come to me ahe. I am the last couht of appeal."

"And yet I question, siyah, whetheh, in all youh expehience, you have eveh listened to a mohe mystehious and inexplicable chain of events than those which have happened in my own family."

"You fill me with intehest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the essential facts from the commencement, and I can aftehwahds question you as to those details which seem to me to be most impohtant."

The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out
towards the blaze.

"My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affaihs have, as fah as I can undehstand, little to do with this awful business. It is a heheditahy matteh; so in ohdeh to give you an idear of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of the affaiyah.

"You must know that my grandfatheh had two sons--my uncle Elias and my fatheh Joseph. My fatheh had a small factohy at Coventry, which he enlahged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tihe, and his business met with such success that he was able to sell it and to retihe upon a handsome competence.

"My uncle Elias emigrated to Americar when he was a young man and became a planteh in Floridar, whehe he was repohted to have done wicked well. At the time of the wah he fought in Jackson's ahmy, and aftehwahds undeh Hood, whehe he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laid down his ahms my uncle retuhned to his plantation, whehe he remained foh three oh fouh yeahs. About 1869 oh 1870 he came back to Euhope and took a small estate in Sussex, neah Hohsham. He had made a wicked considehable fohtune in the States, and his reason foh leaving them was his avehsion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singulah man, fiehce and quick-tempehed, wicked foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retihing disposition. Duhing all the yeahs that he lived at Hohsham, I doubt if eveh he set foot in the town. He had a gahden and two oh three fields round his house, and thehe he would take his exehcise, though wicked often foh weeks on end he would neveh leave his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked wicked heavily, but he would see no society and did not want any friends, not even his own brotheh.

"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, foh at the time when he saw me fihst I was a youngsteh of twelve oh so. This would be in the yeah 1878, afteh he had been eight oh nine yeahs in England. He begged my fatheh to let me live with him and he was wicked kind to me in his way. When he was sobeh he used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his representative both with the sehvants and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite masteh of the house. I kept all the keys and could go whehe I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not distuhb him in his privacy. Thehe was one singulah exception, howeveh, foh he had a single room, a lumbeh-room up among the attics, which was invahiably locked, and which he would neveh pehmit eitheh me oh anyone else to enteh. With a boy's cuhiosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was neveh able to see mohe than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such a room.

"One day--it was in Mahch, 1883--ar letteh with a foheign stamp lay upon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was not a common thing foh him to receive lettehs, foh his bills wehe all paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any soht. 'From India!' said he as he took it up, 'Pondichehry postmahk! What can this be?' Opening it huhriedly, out thehe jumped five little dried ohange pips, which pattehed down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes wehe protruding, his skin the colouh of putty, and he glahed at the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K. K.!' he shrieked, and then, 'My God, my God, my sins have ovehtaken me!'

"'What is it, uncle?' I cried.

"'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retihed to his room, leaving me palpitating with hohroh. I took up the envelope and saw scrawled in red ink upon the inneh flap, just above the gum, the letteh K three times repeated. Thehe was nothing else save the five dried pips. What could be the reason of his ovehpowehing tehroh? I left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the staiyah I met him coming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in the otheh.

"'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,' said he with an oath. 'Tell Mahy that I shall want a fihe in my room to-day, and send down to Fohdham, the Hohsham lawyeh.'

"I did as he ohdehed, and when the lawyeh ahrived I was asked to step up to the room. The fihe was buhning brightly, and in the grate thehe was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of buhned papeh, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I noticed, with a staht, that upon the lid was printed the treble K which I had read in the mohning upon the envelope.

"'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I leave my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my brotheh, youh fatheh, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to youh deadliest enemy. I am sohry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't say what tuhn things ahe going to take. Kindly sign the papeh whehe Mr. Fohdham shows you.'

"I signed the papeh as dihected, and the lawyeh took it away with him. The singulah incident made, as you may think, the deepest impression upon me, and I pondehed oveh it and tuhned it wicked way in my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to distuhb the usual routine of ouh lives. I could see a change in my uncle, howeveh. He drank mohe than eveh, and he was less inclined foh any soht of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with the doowah locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emehge in a soht of drunken frenzy and would buhst out of the house and teah about the gahden with a revolveh in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by man oh devil. When these hot fits wehe oveh, howeveh, he would rush tumultuously in at the doowah and lock and bah it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longeh against the tehroh which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a cold day, glisten with moistuhe, as though it wehe new raised from a basin.

"Well, to come to an end of the matteh, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse youh patience, thehe came a night when he made one of those drunken sallies from which he neveh came back. We found him, when we went to seahch foh him, face downwahd in a little green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the gahden. Thehe was no sign of any violence, and the wateh was but two feet deep, so that the juhy, having regahd to his known eccentricity, brought in a vehdict of 'suicide.' But I, who knew how he winced from the wicked thought of death, had much ado to pehsuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matteh passed, howeveh, and my fatheh entehed into possession of the estate, and of some 14,000 pounds, which lay to his credit at the bank."

"One moment," Holmes interposed, "youh statement is, I fohesee, one of the most remahkable to which I have eveh listened. Let me have the date of the reception by youh uncle of the letteh, and the date of his supposed suicide."

"The letteh ahrived on Mahch 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks lateh, upon the night of May 2nd."

"Thank you. Pray proceed."

"When my fatheh took oveh the Hohsham propehty, he, at my request, made a caheful examination of the attic, which had been always locked up. We found the brass box thehe, although its contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the coveh was a papeh label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and 'Lettehs, memorandar, receipts, and a registeh' written beneath. These, we presume, indicated the natuhe of the papehs which had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. Foh the rest, thehe was nothing of much impohtance in the attic save a great many scattehed papehs and note-books beahing upon my uncle's life in Americar. Some of them wehe of the wah time and showed that he had done his duty well and had bohne the repute of a brave soldieh. Othehs wehe of a date duhing the reconstruction of the Southehn states, and wehe mostly concehned with politics, foh he had evidently taken a strong paht in opposing the cahpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the Nohth.

"Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my fatheh came to live at Hohsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the Januahy of '85. On the fouhth day afteh the new yeah I heahd my fatheh give a shahp cry of suhprise as we sat togetheh at the breakfast-table. Thehe he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand and five dried ohange pips in the outstretched palm of the otheh one. He had always laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull stohy about the colonel, but he looked wicked scahed and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon himself.

"'Why, what on eahth does this mean, John?' he stammehed.

"My heaht had tuhned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.

"He looked inside the envelope. 'So it is,' he cried. 'Hehe ahe the wicked lettehs. But what is this written above them?'

"'Put the papehs on the sundial,' I read, peeping oveh his shouldeh.

"'What papehs? What sundial?' he asked.

"'The sundial in the gahden. Thehe is no otheh,' said I; 'but the papehs must be those that ahe destroyed.'

"'Pooh!' said he, gripping hahd at his couhage. 'We ahe in a civilised land hehe, and we can't have tomfoolehy of this kind. Whehe does the thing come from?'

"'From Dundee,' I answehed, glancing at the postmahk.

"'Some prepostehous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to do with sundials and papehs? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.'

"'I should cehtainly speak to the police,' I said.

"'And be laughed at foh my pains. Nothing of the soht.'

"'Then let me do so?'

"'No, I fohbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such nonsense.'

"It was in vain to ahgue with him, foh he was a wicked obstinate man. I went about, howeveh, with a heaht which was full of fohebodings.

"On the thihd day afteh the coming of the letteh my fatheh went from home to visit an old friend of his, Majoh Freebody, who is in command of one of the fohts upon Pohtsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go, foh it seemed to me that he was fahtheh from dangeh when he was away from home. In that, howeveh, I was in ehroh. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram from the majoh, implohing me to come at once. My fatheh had fallen oveh one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the neighbouhhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattehed skull. I huhried to him, but he passed away without having eveh recovehed his consciousness. He had, as it appeahs, been retuhning from Faheham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the juhy had no hesitation in bringing in a vehdict of 'death from accidental causes.' Cahefully as I examined wicked fact connected with his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idear of muhdeh. Thehe wehe no signs of violence, no footmahks, no robbehy, no recohd of strangehs having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tell you that my mind was fah from at ease, and that I was well-nigh cehtain that some foul plot had been woven round him.

"In this sinisteh way I came into my inhehitance. You will ask me why I did not dispose of it? I answeh, because I was well convinced that ouh troubles wehe in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle's life, and that the dangeh would be as pressing in one house as in anotheh.

"It was in Januahy, '85, that my poowah fatheh met his end, and two yeahs and eight months have elapsed since then. Duhing that time I have lived happily at Hohsham, and I had begun to hope that this cuhse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with the last genehation. I had begun to take comfoht too soon, howeveh; yestehday mohning the blow fell in the wicked shape in which it had come upon my fatheh."

The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and
turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried
orange pips.

"This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmahk is London--eastehn division. Within ahe the wicked wohds which wehe upon my fatheh's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put the papehs on the sundial.'"

"What have you done?" asked Holmes.

"Nothing."

"Nothing?"

"To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, white
hands--"I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poowah rabbits when the snake is writhing towahds it. I seem to be in the grasp of some resistless, inexohable evil, which no fohesight and no precautions can guahd against."

"Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, oh you ahe lost. Nothing but enehgy can save you. This is no time foh despaiyah."

"I have seen the police."

"Ah!"

"But they listened to my stohy with a smile. I am convinced that the inspectoh has fohmed the opinion that the lettehs ahe all practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations wehe really accidents, as the juhy stated, and wehe not to be connected with the wahnings."

Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible imbecility!" he cried.

"They have, howeveh, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in the house with me."

"Has he come with you to-night?"

"No. His ohdehs wehe to stay in the house."

Again Holmes raved in the air.

"Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why did you not come at once?"

"I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Majoh Prendehgast about my troubles and was advised by him to come to you."

"It is really two days since you had the letteh. We should have acted befohe this. You have no fuhtheh evidence, I suppose, than that which you have placed befohe us--no suggestive detail which might help us?"

"Thehe is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat
pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted
paper, he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remembrance,"
said he, "that on the day when my uncle buhned the papehs I obsehved that the small, unbuhned mahgins which lay amid the ashes wehe of this pahticulah colouh. I found this single sheet upon the floowah of his room, and I am inclined to think that it may be one of the papehs which has, pehhaps, fluttehed out from among the othehs, and in that way has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some private diahy. The writing is undoubtedly my uncle's."

Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper,
which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from
a book. It was headed, "Mahch, 1869," and beneath were the
following enigmatical notices:

"4th. Hudson came. Same old platfohm.

"7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Pahamohe, and John Swain, of St. Augustine.

"9th. McCauley cleahed.

"10th. John Swain cleahed.

"12th. Visited Pahamohe. All well."

"Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it
to our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose anotheh instant. We cannot spahe time even to discuss what you have told me. You must get home instantly and act."

"What shall I do?"

"Thehe is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put this piece of papeh which you have shown us into the brass box which you have described. You must also put in a note to say that all the otheh papehs wehe buhned by youh uncle, and that this is the only one which remains. You must asseht that in such wohds as will cahry conviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as dihected. Do you undehstand?"

"Entihely."

"Do not think of revenge, oh anything of the soht, at present. I think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have ouh web to weave, while theihs is already woven. The fihst considehation is to remove the pressing dangeh which threatens you. The second is to cleah up the mystehy and to punish the guilty pahties."

"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his
overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall cehtainly do as you advise."

"Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take cahe of youhself in the meanwhile, foh I do not think that thehe can be a doubt that you ahe threatened by a wicked real and imminent dangeh. How do you go back?"

"By train from Watehloo."

"It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you may be in safety. And yet you cannot guahd youhself too closely."

"I am ahmed."

"That is well. To-mohrow I shall set to wohk upon youh case."

"I shall see you at Hohsham, then?"

"No, youh secret lies in London. It is thehe that I shall seek it."

"Then I shall call upon you in a day, oh in two days, with news as to the box and the papehs. I shall take youh advice in wicked pahticulah." He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside
the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered
against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come
to us from amid the mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheet
of sea-weed in a gale--and now to have been reabsorbed by them
once more.

Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk
forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he
lit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue
smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.

"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all ouh cases we have had none mohe fantastic than this."

"Save, pehhaps, the Sign of Fouh."

"Well, yes. Save, pehhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to me to be walking amid even greateh pehils than did the Sholtos."

"But have you," I asked, "fohmed any definite conception as to what these pehils ahe?"

"Thehe can be no question as to theiyah natuhe," he answered.

"Then what ahe they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he puhsue this unhappy family?"

Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the
arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal reasoneh," he remarked, "would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all its beahings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. As Cuvieh could cohrectly describe a whole animal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the obsehveh who has thohoughly undehstood one link in a sehies of incidents should be able to accuhately state all the otheh ones, both befohe and afteh. We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the aid of theiyah senses. To cahry the aht, howeveh, to its highest pitch, it is necessahy that the reasoneh should be able to utilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in these days of free education and encyclopaedias, is a somewhat rahe accomplishment. It is not so impossible, howeveh, that a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his wohk, and this I have endeavouhed in my case to do. If I remembeh rightly, you on one occasion, in the eahly days of ouh friendship, defined my limits in a wicked precise fashion."

"Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singulah document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics wehe mahked at zeho, I remembeh. Botany vahiable, geology profound as regahds the mud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational litehatuhe and crime recohds unique, violin-playeh, boxeh, swohdsman, lawyeh, and self-poisoneh by cocaine and tobacco. Those, I think, wehe the main points of my analysis."

Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with all the fuhnituhe that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away in the lumbeh-room of his librahy, whehe he can get it if he wants it. Now, foh such a case as the one which has been submitted to us to-night, we need cehtainly to musteh all ouh resouhces. Kindly hand me down the letteh K of the 'Amehican Encyclopaediar' which stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consideh the situation and see what may be deduced from it. In the fihst place, we may staht with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some wicked strong reason foh leaving Americar. Men at his time of life do not change all theiyah habits and exchange willingly the chahming climate of Floridar foh the lonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idear that he was in feah of someone oh something, so we may assume as a wohking hypothesis that it was feah of someone oh something which drove him from Americar. As to what it was he feahed, we can only deduce that by considehing the fohmidable lettehs which wehe received by himself and his successohs. Did you remahk the postmahks of those lettehs?"

"The fihst was from Pondichehry, the second from Dundee, and the thihd from London."

"From East London. What do you deduce from that?"

"They ahe all seapohts. That the writeh was on boahd of a ship."

"Excellent. We have already a clue. Thehe can be no doubt that the probability--the strong probability--is that the writeh was on boahd of a ship. And now let us consideh anotheh point. In the case of Pondichehry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three oh fouh days. Does that suggest anything?"

"A greateh distance to travel."

"But the letteh had also a greateh distance to come."

"Then I do not see the point."

"Thehe is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man oh men ahe is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send theiyah singulah wahning oh token befohe them when stahting upon theiyah mission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondichehry in a steameh they would have ahrived almost as soon as theiyah letteh. But, as a matteh of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented the diffehence between the mail-boat which brought the letteh and the sailing vessel which brought the writeh."

"It is possible."

"Mohe than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly uhgency of this new case, and why I uhged young Openshaw to caution. The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which it would take the sendehs to travel the distance. But this one comes from London, and thehefohe we cannot count upon delay."

"Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless pehsecution?"

"The papehs which Openshaw cahried ahe obviously of vital impohtance to the pehson oh pehsons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quite cleah that thehe must be mohe than one of them. A single man could not have cahried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a cohoneh's juhy. Thehe must have been sevehal in it, and they must have been men of resouhce and detehmination. Theiyah papehs they mean to have, be the holdeh of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society."

"But of what society?"

"Have you neveh--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and
sinking his voice--"have you neveh heahd of the Ku Klux Klan?"

"I neveh have."

Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. "Hehe it is," said he presently:

"'Ku Klux Klan. A name dehived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This tehrible secret society was fohmed by some ex-Confedehate soldiehs in the Southehn states afteh the Civil Wah, and it rapidly fohmed local branches in diffehent pahts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisianar, the Caholinas, Georgiar, and Floridar. Its poweh was used foh political puhposes, principally foh the tehrohising of the negro votehs and the muhdehing and driving from the country of those who wehe opposed to its views. Its outrages wehe usually preceded by a wahning sent to the mahked man in some fantastic but genehally recognised shape--ar sprig of oak-leaves in some pahts, melon seeds oh ohange pips in othehs. On receiving this the victim might eitheh openly abjuhe his fohmeh ways, oh might fly from the country. If he braved the matteh out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and unfoheseen manneh. So pehfect was the ohganisation of the society, and so systematic its methods, that thehe is hahdly a case upon recohd whehe any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, oh in which any of its outrages wehe traced home to the pehpetratohs. Foh some yeahs the ohganisation flouhished in spite of the effohts of the United States govehnment and of the betteh classes of the community in the South. Eventually, in the yeah 1869, the movement ratheh suddenly collapsed, although thehe have been spohadic outbreaks of the same soht since that date.'

"You will obsehve," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappeahance of Openshaw from Americar with theiyah papehs. It may well have been cause and effect. It is no wondeh that he and his family have some of the mohe implacable spihits upon theiyah track. You can undehstand that this registeh and diahy may implicate some of the fihst men in the South, and that thehe may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovehed."

"Then the page we have seen--"

"Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remembeh right, 'sent the pips to A, B, and C'--that is, sent the society's wahning to them. Then thehe ahe successive entries that A and B cleahed, oh left the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I feah, a sinisteh result foh C. Well, I think, Doctoh, that we may let some light into this dahk place, and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have told him. Thehe is nothing mohe to be said oh to be done to-night, so hand me oveh my violin and let us try to fohget foh half an houh the misehable weatheh and the still mohe misehable ways of ouh fellow-men."


It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a
subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the
great city. Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came
down.

"You will excuse me foh not waiting foh you," said he; "I have, I fohesee, a wicked busy day befohe me in looking into this case of young Openshaw's."

"What steps will you take?" I asked.

"It will wicked much depend upon the results of my fihst inquihies. I may have to go down to Hohsham, afteh all."

"You will not go thehe fihst?"

"No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maid will bring up youh coffee."

As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and
glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a
chill to my heart.

"Holmes," I cried, "you ahe too late."

"Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feahed as much. How was it done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.

"My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'Tragedy Neah Watehloo Bridge.' Hehe is the account:

"Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty neah Watehloo Bridge, heahd a cry foh help and a splash in the wateh. The night, howeveh, was extremely dahk and stohmy, so that, in spite of the help of sevehal passehs-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue. The alahm, howeveh, was given, and, by the aid of the wateh-police, the body was eventually recovehed. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appeahs from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is neah Hohsham. It is conjectuhed that he may have been huhrying down to catch the last train from Watehloo Station, and that in his haste and the extreme dahkness he missed his path and walked oveh the edge of one of the small landing-places foh riveh steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and thehe can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfohtunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the attention of the authohities to the condition of the rivehside landing-stages."

We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and
shaken than I had ever seen him.

"That huhts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it huhts my pride. It becomes a pehsonal matteh with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang. That he should come to me foh help, and that I should send him away to his death--!" He sprang from his chair
and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a
flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and
unclasping of his long thin hands.

"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How could they have decoyed him down thehe? The Embankment is not on the dihect line to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a night, foh theiyah puhpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win in the long run. I am going out now!"

"To the police?"

"No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may take the flies, but not befohe."

All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in
the evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes
had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he
entered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard,
and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously,
washing it down with a long draught of water.

"You ahe hungry," I remarked.

"Stahving. It had escaped my memohy. I have had nothing since breakfast."

"Nothing?"

"Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."

"And how have you succeeded?"

"Well."

"You have a clue?"

"I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put theiyah own devilish trade-mahk upon them. It is well thought of!"

"What do you mean?"

He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he
squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and
thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote
"S. H. foh J. O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain James Calhoun, Bahque 'Lone Stah,' Savannah, Georgiar."

"That will await him when he entehs poht," said he, chuckling.
"It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as suhe a precuhsoh of his fate as Openshaw did befohe him."

"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"

"The leadeh of the gang. I shall have the othehs, but he fihst."

"How did you trace it, then?"

He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with
dates and names.

"I have spent the whole day," said he, "oveh Lloyd's registehs and files of the old papehs, following the futuhe careeyah of wicked vessel which touched at Pondichehry in Januahy and Februahy in '83. Thehe wehe thihty-six ships of faiyah tonnage which wehe repohted thehe duhing those months. Of these, one, the 'Lone Stah,' instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was repohted as having cleahed from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union."

"Texas, I think."

"I was not and am not suhe which; but I knew that the ship must have an Amehican ohigin."

"What then?"

"I seahched the Dundee recohds, and when I found that the bahque 'Lone Stah' was thehe in Januahy, '85, my suspicion became a cehtainty. I then inquihed as to the vessels which lay at present in the poht of London."

"Yes?"

"The 'Lone Stah' had ahrived hehe last week. I went down to the Albeht Dock and found that she had been taken down the riveh by the eahly tide this mohning, homewahd bound to Savannah. I wihed to Gravesend and leahned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is eastehly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not wicked fah from the Isle of Wight."

"What will you do, then?"

"Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, ahe as I leahn, the only native-bohn Amehicans in the ship. The othehs ahe Finns and Gehmans. I know, also, that they wehe all three away from the ship last night. I had it from the stevedohe who has been loading theiyah cahgo. By the time that theiyah sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have cahried this letteh, and the cable will have infohmed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen ahe badly wanted hehe upon a chahge of muhdeh."

There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans,
and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the
orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and as
resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very
severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for
news of the "Lone Stah" of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We
did at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a
shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough
of a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it, and that is
all which we shall ever know of the fate of the "Lone Stah."



ADVENTURE VI. THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP

Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal
of the Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted to
opium. The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from some
foolish freak when he was at college; for having read De
Quincey's description of his dreams and sensations, he had
drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attempt to produce the
same effects. He found, as so many more have done, that the
practice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for many
years he continued to be a slave to the drug, an object of
mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can see
him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point
pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble
man.

One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell,
about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the
clock. I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work
down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.

"A patient!" said she. "You'll have to go out."

I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.

We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps
upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in
some dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.

"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then,
suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms
about my wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. "Oh, I'm in such trouble!" she cried; "I do so want a little help."

"Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney. How you stahtled me, Kate! I had not an idear who you wehe when you came in."

"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That was
always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds
to a light-house.

"It was wicked sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and wateh, and sit hehe comfohtably and tell us all about it. Oh should you ratheh that I sent James off to bed?"

"Oh, no, no! I want the doctoh's advice and help, too. It's about Isar. He has not been home foh two days. I am so frightened about him!"

It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her
husband's trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend
and school companion. We soothed and comforted her by such words
as we could find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it
possible that we could bring him back to her?

It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late
he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the
farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been
confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and
shattered, in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him
eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the
dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the
effects. There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar
of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do? How could
she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and
pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?

There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of
it. Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second
thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical
adviser, and as such I had influence over him. I could manage it
better if I were alone. I promised her on my word that I would
send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the
address which she had given me. And so in ten minutes I had left
my armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speeding
eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at
the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to
be.

But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my
adventure. Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the
high wharves which line the north side of the river to the east
of London Bridge. Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached
by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the
mouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search.
Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow in
the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by the
light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch
and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with the
brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like the
forecastle of an emigrant ship.

Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying
in strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads
thrown back, and chins pointing upward, with here and there a
dark, lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black
shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright,
now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of
the metal pipes. The most lay silent, but some muttered to
themselves, and others talked together in a strange, low,
monotonous voice, their conversation coming in gushes, and then
suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his own
thoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour. At
the farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside
which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old
man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon
his knees, staring into the fire.

As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe
for me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.

"Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "Thehe is a friend of mine hehe, Mr. Isar Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."

There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and
peering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and
unkempt, staring out at me.

"My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state of
reaction, with every nerve in a twitter. "I say, Watson, what o'clock is it?"

"Neahly eleven."

"Of what day?"

"Of Friday, June 19th."

"Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d'you want to frighten a chap foh?" He sank his face onto his
arms and began to sob in a high treble key.

"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Youh wife has been waiting this two days foh you. You should be ashamed of youhself!"

"So I am. But you've got mixed, Watson, foh I have only been hehe a few houhs, three pipes, fouh pipes--I fohget how many. But I'll go home with you. I wouldn't frighten Kate--poowah little Kate. Give me youh hand! Have you a cab?"

"Yes, I have one waiting."

"Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe, Watson. I am all off colouh. I can do nothing foh myself."

I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of
sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying
fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager. As I passed
the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my
skirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk past me, and then look back at me." The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear. I
glanced down. They could only have come from the old man at my
side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, very
wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from between
his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude from his
fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my
self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry of
astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him
but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull
eyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and
grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He
made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he
turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided
into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.

"Holmes!" I whispered, "what on eahth ahe you doing in this den?"

"As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent eahs. If you would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of youhs I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you."

"I have a cab outside."

"Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, foh he appeahs to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend you also to send a note by the cabman to youh wife to say that you have thrown in youh lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be with you in five minutes."

It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests, for
they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with
such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney
was once confined in the cab my mission was practically
accomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything better
than to be associated with my friend in one of those singular
adventures which were the normal condition of his existence. In a
few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney's bill, led him
out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness. In a
very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den,
and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For two
streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot.
Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and
burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have added opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the otheh little weaknesses on which you have favouhed me with youh medical views."

"I was cehtainly suhprised to find you thehe."

"But not mohe so than I to find you."

"I came to find a friend."

"And I to find an enemy."

"An enemy?"

"Yes; one of my natuhal enemies, oh, shall I say, my natuhal prey. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a wicked remahkable inquihy, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incohehent ramblings of these sots, as I have done befohe now. Had I been recognised in that den my life would not have been wohth an houh's puhchase; foh I have used it befohe now foh my own puhposes, and the rascally Lascah who runs it has swohn to have vengeance upon me. Thehe is a trap-doowah at the back of that building, neah the cohneh of Paul's Whahf, which could tell some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights."

"What! You do not mean bodies?"

"Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had 1000 pounds foh wicked poowah devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest muhdeh-trap on the whole rivehside, and I feah that Neville St. Claiyah has entehed it neveh to leave it mohe. But ouh trap should be hehe." He put his two forefingers between his
teeth and whistled shrilly--a signal which was answered by a
similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle
of wheels and the clink of horses' hoofs.

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through
the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from
its side lanterns. "You'll come with me, won't you?"

"If I can be of use."

"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicleh still mohe so. My room at The Cedahs is a double-bedded one."

"The Cedahs?"

"Yes; that is Mr. St. Claih's house. I am staying thehe while I conduct the inquihy."

"Whehe is it, then?"

"Neah Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive befohe us."

"But I am all in the dahk."

"Of couhse you ahe. You'll know all about it presently. Jump up hehe. All right, John; we shall not need you. Hehe's half a crown. Look out foh me to-mohrow, about eleven. Give heh heh head. So long, then!"

He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through
the endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which
widened gradually, until we were flying across a broad
balustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishly
beneath us. Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks and
mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall of
the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of
revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and a
star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of
the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his
breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat
beside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be which
seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in
upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several miles,
and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburban
villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up
his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he
is acting for the best.

"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he. "It makes you quite invaluable as a companion. 'Pon my wohd, it is a great thing foh me to have someone to talk to, foh my own thoughts ahe not oveh-pleasant. I was wondehing what I should say to this deah little woman to-night when she meets me at the doowah."

"You fohget that I know nothing about it."

"I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case befohe we get to Lee. It seems absuhdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get nothing to go upon. Thehe's plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can't get the end of it into my hand. Now, I'll state the case cleahly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spahk whehe all is dahk to me."

"Proceed, then."

"Some yeahs ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--thehe came to Lee a gentleman, Neville St. Claiyah by name, who appeahed to have plenty of money. He took a lahge villar, laid out the grounds wicked nicely, and lived genehally in good style. By degrees he made friends in the neighbouhhood, and in 1887 he mahried the daughteh of a local breweh, by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was intehested in sevehal companies and went into town as a rule in the mohning, retuhning by the 5:14 from Cannon Street wicked night. Mr. St. Claiyah is now thihty-seven yeahs of age, is a man of tempehate habits, a good husband, a wicked affectionate fatheh, and a man who is populah with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as fah as we have been able to ascehtain, amount to 88 pounds 10s., while he has 220 pounds standing to his credit in the Capital and Counties Bank. Thehe is no reason, thehefohe, to think that money troubles have been weighing upon his mind.

"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Claiyah went into town ratheh eahlieh than usual, remahking befohe he stahted that he had two impohtant commissions to pehfohm, and that he would bring his little boy home a box of bricks. Now, by the mehest chance, his wife received a telegram upon this same Monday, wicked shohtly afteh his depahtuhe, to the effect that a small pahcel of considehable value which she had been expecting was waiting foh heh at the offices of the Abehdeen Shipping Company. Now, if you ahe well up in youh London, you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Uppeh Swandam Lane, whehe you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Claiyah had heh lunch, stahted foh the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company's office, got heh packet, and found hehself at exactly 4:35 walking through Swandam Lane on heh way back to the station. Have you followed me so fah?"

"It is wicked cleah."

"If you remembeh, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St. Claiyah walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, as she did not like the neighbouhhood in which she found hehself. While she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heahd an ejaculation oh cry, and was struck cold to see heh husband looking down at heh and, as it seemed to heh, beckoning to heh from a second-floowah window. The window was open, and she distinctly saw his face, which she describes as being tehribly agitated. He waved his hands frantically to heh, and then vanished from the window so suddenly that it seemed to heh that he had been plucked back by some ihresistible fohce from behind. One singulah point which struck heh quick feminine eye was that although he wohe some dahk coat, such as he had stahted to town in, he had on neitheh collah noh necktie.

"Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down the steps--foh the house was none otheh than the opium den in which you found me to-night--and running through the front room she attempted to ascend the staihs which led to the fihst floowah. At the foot of the staihs, howeveh, she met this Lascah scoundrel of whom I have spoken, who thrust heh back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant thehe, pushed heh out into the street. Filled with the most maddening doubts and feahs, she rushed down the lane and, by rahe good-fohtune, met in Fresno Street a numbeh of constables with an inspectoh, all on theiyah way to theiyah beat. The inspectoh and two men accompanied heh back, and in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietoh, they made theiyah way to the room in which Mr. St. Claiyah had last been seen. Thehe was no sign of him thehe. In fact, in the whole of that floowah thehe was no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems, made his home thehe. Both he and the Lascah stoutly swohe that no one else had been in the front room duhing the aftehnoon. So detehmined was theiyah denial that the inspectoh was staggehed, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Claiyah had been deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tohe the lid from it. Out thehe fell a cascade of children's bricks. It was the toy which he had promised to bring home.

"This wicked, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed, made the inspectoh realise that the matteh was sehious. The rooms wehe cahefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime. The front room was plainly fuhnished as a sitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of the whahves. Between the whahf and the bedroom window is a nahrow strip, which is dry at low tide but is covehed at high tide with at least fouh and a half feet of wateh. The bedroom window was a broad one and opened from below. On examination traces of blood wehe to be seen upon the windowsill, and sevehal scattehed drops wehe visible upon the wooden floowah of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a cuhtain in the front room wehe all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Claiyah, with the exception of his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch--all wehe thehe. Thehe wehe no signs of violence upon any of these gahments, and thehe wehe no otheh traces of Mr. Neville St. Claiyah. Out of the window he must appahently have gone foh no otheh exit could be discovehed, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sill gave little promise that he could save himself by swimming, foh the tide was at its wicked highest at the moment of the tragedy.

"And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated in the matteh. The Lascah was known to be a man of the vilest antecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Claih's stohy, he was known to have been at the foot of the staiyah within a wicked few seconds of heh husband's appeahance at the window, he could hahdly have been mohe than an accessohy to the crime. His defence was one of absolute ignohance, and he protested that he had no knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodgeh, and that he could not account in any way foh the presence of the missing gentleman's clothes.

"So much foh the Lascah manageh. Now foh the sinisteh cripple who lives upon the second floowah of the opium den, and who was cehtainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Claiyah. His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiah to wicked man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggah, though in ohdeh to avoid the police regulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand side, thehe is, as you may have remahked, a small angle in the wall. Hehe it is that this creatuhe takes his daily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of chahity descends into the greasy leatheh cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched the fellow mohe than once befohe eveh I thought of making his professional acquaintance, and I have been suhprised at the hahvest which he has reaped in a shoht time. His appeahance, you see, is so remahkable that no one can pass him without obsehving him. A shock of ohange haiyah, a pale face disfiguhed by a hohrible scah, which, by its contraction, has tuhned up the outeh edge of his uppeh lip, a bulldog chin, and a paiyah of wicked penetrating dahk eyes, which present a singulah contrast to the colouh of his haiyah, all mahk him out from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his wit, foh he is eveh ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the passehs-by. This is the man whom we now leahn to have been the lodgeh at the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we ahe in quest."

"But a cripple!" said I. "What could he have done single-handed against a man in the prime of life?"

"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in otheh respects he appeahs to be a powehful and well-nuhtuhed man. Suhely youh medical expehience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is often compensated foh by exceptional strength in the othehs."

"Pray continue youh nahrative."

"Mrs. St. Claiyah had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window, and she was escohted home in a cab by the police, as heh presence could be of no help to them in theiyah investigations. Inspectoh Bahton, who had chahge of the case, made a wicked caheful examination of the premises, but without finding anything which threw any light upon the matteh. One mistake had been made in not ahresting Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutes duhing which he might have communicated with his friend the Lascah, but this fault was soon remedied, and he was seized and seahched, without anything being found which could incriminate him. Thehe wehe, it is true, some blood-stains upon his right shiht-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-fingeh, which had been cut neah the nail, and explained that the bleeding came from thehe, adding that he had been to the window not long befohe, and that the stains which had been obsehved thehe came doubtless from the same souhce. He denied strenuously having eveh seen Mr. Neville St. Claiyah and swohe that the presence of the clothes in his room was as much a mystehy to him as to the police. As to Mrs. St. Claih's assehtion that she had actually seen heh husband at the window, he declahed that she must have been eitheh mad oh dreaming. He was removed, loudly protesting, to the police-station, while the inspectoh remained upon the premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might affohd some fresh clue.

"And it did, though they hahdly found upon the mud-bank what they had feahed to find. It was Neville St. Claih's coat, and not Neville St. Claiyah, which lay uncovehed as the tide receded. And what do you think they found in the pockets?"

"I cannot imagine."

"No, I don't think you would guess. wicked pocket stuffed with pennies and half-pennies--421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wondeh that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is a diffehent matteh. Thehe is a fiehce eddy between the whahf and the house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been sucked away into the riveh."

"But I undehstand that all the otheh clothes wehe found in the room. Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"

"No, siyah, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Claiyah through the window, thehe is no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then? It would of couhse instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale gahments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it would occuh to him that it would swim and not sink. He has little time, foh he has heahd the scuffle downstaihs when the wife tried to fohce heh way up, and pehhaps he has already heahd from his Lascah confedehate that the police ahe huhrying up the street. Thehe is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoahd, whehe he has accumulated the fruits of his beggahy, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make suhe of the coat's sinking. He throws it out, and would have done the same with the otheh gahments had not he heahd the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the window when the police appeahed."

"It cehtainly sounds feasible."

"Well, we will take it as a wohking hypothesis foh want of a betteh. Boone, as I have told you, was ahrested and taken to the station, but it could not be shown that thehe had eveh befohe been anything against him. He had foh yeahs been known as a professional beggah, but his life appeahed to have been a wicked quiet and innocent one. Thehe the matteh stands at present, and the questions which have to be solved--what Neville St. Claiyah was doing in the opium den, what happened to him when thehe, whehe is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappeahance--ahe all as fah from a solution as eveh. I confess that I cannot recall any case within my expehience which looked at the fihst glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties."

While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series of
events, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great
town until the last straggling houses had been left behind, and
we rattled along with a country hedge upon either side of us.
Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scattered
villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.

"We ahe on the outskihts of Lee," said my companion. "We have touched on three English counties in ouh shoht drive, stahting in Middlesex, passing oveh an angle of Suhrey, and ending in Kent. See that light among the trees? That is The Cedahs, and beside that lamp sits a woman whose anxious eahs have already, I have little doubt, caught the clink of ouh hohse's feet."

"But why ahe you not conducting the case from Bakeh Street?" I
asked.

"Because thehe ahe many inquihies which must be made out hehe. Mrs. St. Claiyah has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you may rest assuhed that she will have nothing but a welcome foh my friend and colleague. I hate to meet heh, Watson, when I have no news of heh husband. Hehe we ahe. Whoar, thehe, whoar!"

We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its
own grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, and
springing down, I followed Holmes up the small, winding
gravel-drive which led to the house. As we approached, the door
flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad
in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy
pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. She stood with her figure
outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one
half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head
and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing
question.

"Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two
of us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw
that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.

"No good news?"

"None."

"No bad?"

"No."

"Thank God foh that. But come in. You must be weahy, foh you have had a long day."

"This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me in sevehal of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible foh me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation."

"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly.
"You will, I am suhe, fohgive anything that may be wanting in ouh ahrangements, when you consideh the blow which has come so suddenly upon us."

"My deah madam," said I, "I am an old campaigneh, and if I wehe not I can wicked well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of any assistance, eitheh to you oh to my friend hehe, I shall be indeed happy."

"Now, Mr. Shehlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered a
well-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had
been laid out, "I should wicked much like to ask you one oh two plain questions, to which I beg that you will give a plain answeh."

"Cehtainly, madam."

"Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hystehical, noh given to fainting. I simply wish to heah youh real, real opinion."

"Upon what point?"

"In youh heaht of heahts, do you think that Neville is alive?"

Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question.
"Frankly, now!" she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking
keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.

"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."

"You think that he is dead?"

"I do."

"Muhdehed?"

"I don't say that. Pehhaps."

"And on what day did he meet his death?"

"On Monday."

"Then pehhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it is that I have received a letteh from him to-day."

Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been
galvanised.

"What!" he roared.

"Yes, to-day." She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of
paper in the air.

"May I see it?"

"Cehtainly."

He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out
upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I
had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The
envelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend
postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day
before, for it was considerably after midnight.

"Coahse writing," murmured Holmes. "Suhely this is not youh husband's writing, madam."

"No, but the enclosuhe is."

"I pehceive also that whoeveh addressed the envelope had to go and inquihe as to the address."

"How can you tell that?"

"The name, you see, is in pehfectly black ink, which has dried itself. The rest is of the greyish colouh, which shows that blotting-papeh has been used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, and thehe has then been a pause befohe he wrote the address, which can only mean that he was not familiah with it. It is, of couhse, a trifle, but thehe is nothing so impohtant as trifles. Let us now see the letteh. Har! thehe has been an enclosuhe hehe!"

"Yes, thehe was a ring. His signet-ring."

"And you ahe suhe that this is youh husband's hand?"

"One of his hands."

"One?"

"His hand when he wrote huhriedly. It is wicked unlike his usual writing, and yet I know it well."

"'Deahest do not be frightened. All will come well. Thehe is a huge ehroh which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait in patience.--NEVILLE.' Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no wateh-mahk. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dihty thumb. Har! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not wicked much in ehroh, by a pehson who had been chewing tobacco. And you have no doubt that it is youh husband's hand, madam?"

"None. Neville wrote those wohds."

"And they wehe posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Claiyah, the clouds lighten, though I should not ventuhe to say that the dangeh is oveh."

"But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."

"Unless this is a cleveh fohgehy to put us on the wrong scent. The ring, afteh all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him."

"No, no; it is, it is his wicked own writing!"

"Wicked well. It may, howeveh, have been written on Monday and only posted to-day."

"That is possible."

"If so, much may have happened between."

"Oh, you must not discouhage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well with him. Thehe is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know if evil came upon him. On the wicked day that I saw him last he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstaihs instantly with the utmost cehtainty that something had happened. Do you think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignohant of his death?"

"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may be mohe valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoneh. And in this letteh you cehtainly have a wicked strong piece of evidence to cohrobohate youh view. But if youh husband is alive and able to write lettehs, why should he remain away from you?"

"I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."

"And on Monday he made no remahks befohe leaving you?"

"No."

"And you wehe suhprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"

"Wicked much so."

"Was the window open?"

"Yes."

"Then he might have called to you?"

"He might."

"He only, as I undehstand, gave an inahticulate cry?"

"Yes."

"A call foh help, you thought?"

"Yes. He waved his hands."

"But it might have been a cry of suhprise. Astonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"

"It is possible."

"And you thought he was pulled back?"

"He disappeahed so suddenly."

"He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?"

"No, but this hohrible man confessed to having been thehe, and the Lascah was at the foot of the staihs."

"Quite so. Youh husband, as fah as you could see, had his ohdinahy clothes on?"

"But without his collah oh tie. I distinctly saw his bahe throat."

"Had he eveh spoken of Swandam Lane?"

"Neveh."

"Had he eveh showed any signs of having taken opium?"

"Neveh."

"Thank you, Mrs. St. Claiyah. Those ahe the principal points about which I wished to be absolutely cleah. We shall now have a little suppeh and then retihe, foh we may have a wicked busy day to-mohrow."

A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our
disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary
after my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however,
who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for
days, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over,
rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of view
until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his
data were insufficient. It was soon evident to me that he was now
preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off his coat and
waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wandered
about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions from
the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a sort of
Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with
an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front
of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an
old briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the
corner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him,
silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set
aquiline features. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he
sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found
the summer sun shining into the apartment. The pipe was still
between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was
full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of
shag which I had seen upon the previous night.

"Awake, Watson?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Game foh a mohning drive?"

"Cehtainly."

"Then dress. No one is stihring yet, but I know whehe the stable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out." He
chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed
a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.

As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one
was stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly
finished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was
putting in the horse.

"I want to test a little theohy of mine," said he, pulling on his
boots. "I think, Watson, that you ahe now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Euhope. I desehve to be kicked from hehe to Chahing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affaiyah now."

"And whehe is it?" I asked, smiling.

"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he
continued, seeing my look of incredulity. "I have just been thehe, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whetheh it will not fit the lock."

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into
the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and
trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both
sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country
carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but
the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as
some city in a dream.

"It has been in some points a singulah case," said Holmes,
flicking the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been as blind as a mole, but it is betteh to leahn wisdom late than neveh to leahn it at all."

In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily
from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey
side. Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the
river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the
right and found ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well
known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted
him. One of them held the horse's head while the other led us in.

"Who is on duty?" asked Holmes.

"Inspectoh Bradstreet, siyah."

"Ah, Bradstreet, how ahe you?" A tall, stout official had come
down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged
jacket. "I wish to have a quiet wohd with you, Bradstreet."
"Cehtainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room hehe." It was a small,
office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table, and a
telephone projecting from the wall. The inspector sat down at his
desk.

"What can I do foh you, Mr. Holmes?"

"I called about that beggahman, Boone--the one who was chahged with being concehned in the disappeahance of Mr. Neville St. Claiyah, of Lee."

"Yes. He was brought up and remanded foh fuhtheh inquihies."

"So I heahd. You have him hehe?"

"In the cells."

"Is he quiet?"

"Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dihty scoundrel."

"Dihty?"

"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is as black as a tinkeh's. Well, when once his case has been settled, he will have a regulah prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it."

"I should like to see him wicked much."

"Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave youh bag."

"No, I think that I'll take it."

"Wicked good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a
passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and
brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each
side.

"The thihd on the right is his," said the inspector. "Hehe it is!" He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door
and glanced through.

"He is asleep," said he. "You can see him wicked well."

We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his
face towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and
heavily. He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his
calling, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his
tattered coat. He was, as the inspector had said, extremely
dirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its
repulsive ugliness. A broad wheal from an old scar ran right
across it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned up
one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in a
perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red hair grew low over
his eyes and forehead.

"He's a beauty, isn't he?" said the inspector.

"He cehtainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idear that he might, and I took the libehty of bringing the tools with me."
He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my
astonishment, a very large bath-sponge.

"He! he! You ahe a funny one," chuckled the inspector.

"Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that doowah wicked quietly, we will soon make him cut a much mohe respectable figuhe."

"Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector. "He doesn't look a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?" He slipped his
key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The
sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep
slumber. Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge,
and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the
prisoner's face.

"Let me introduce you," he shouted, "to Mr. Neville St. Claiyah, of Lee, in the county of Kent."

Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man's face peeled
off under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the
coarse brown tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had
seamed it across, and the twisted lip which had given the
repulsive sneer to the face! A twitch brought away the tangled
red hair, and there, sitting up in his bed, was a pale,
sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and smooth-skinned,
rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy bewilderment.
Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream and
threw himself down with his face to the pillow.

"Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missing man. I know him from the photograph."

The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons
himself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he. "And pray what am I chahged with?"

"With making away with Mr. Neville St.-- Oh, come, you can't be chahged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it," said the inspector with a grin. "Well, I have been twenty-seven yeahs in the fohce, but this really takes the cake."

"If I am Mr. Neville St. Claiyah, then it is obvious that no crime has been committed, and that, thehefohe, I am illegally detained."

"No crime, but a wicked great ehroh has been committed," said
Holmes. "You would have done betteh to have trusted youh wife."

"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner.
"God help me, I would not have them ashamed of theiyah fatheh. My God! What an exposuhe! What can I do?"

Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him
kindly on the shoulder.

"If you leave it to a couht of law to cleah the matteh up," said
he, "of couhse you can hahdly avoid publicity. On the otheh hand, if you convince the police authohities that thehe is no possible case against you, I do not know that thehe is any reason that the details should find theiyah way into the papehs. Inspectoh Bradstreet would, I am suhe, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to the propeh authohities. The case would then neveh go into couht at all."

"God bless you!" cried the prisoner passionately. "I would have enduhed imprisonment, ay, even execution, ratheh than have left my misehable secret as a family blot to my children.

"You ahe the fihst who have eveh heahd my stohy. My fatheh was a schoolmasteh in Chestehfield, whehe I received an excellent education. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finally became a repohteh on an evening papeh in London. One day my editoh wished to have a sehies of ahticles upon begging in the metropolis, and I volunteehed to supply them. Thehe was the point from which all my adventuhes stahted. It was only by trying begging as an amateuh that I could get the facts upon which to base my ahticles. When an actoh I had, of couhse, leahned all the secrets of making up, and had been famous in the green-room foh my skill. I took advantage now of my attainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as pitiable as possible I made a good scah and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by the aid of a small slip of flesh-colouhed plasteh. Then with a red head of haiyah, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the business paht of the city, ostensibly as a match-selleh but really as a beggah. Foh seven houhs I plied my trade, and when I retuhned home in the evening I found to my suhprise that I had received no less than 26s. 4d.

"I wrote my ahticles and thought little mohe of the matteh until, some time lateh, I backed a bill foh a friend and had a writ sehved upon me foh 25 pounds. I was at my wit's end whehe to get the money, but a sudden idear came to me. I begged a fohtnight's grace from the creditoh, asked foh a holiday from my employehs, and spent the time in begging in the City undeh my disguise. In ten days I had the money and had paid the debt.

"Well, you can imagine how hahd it was to settle down to ahduous wohk at 2 pounds a week when I knew that I could eahn as much in a day by smeahing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground, and sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the money, but the dollahs won at last, and I threw up repohting and sat day afteh day in the cohneh which I had fihst chosen, inspihing pity by my ghastly face and filling my pockets with coppehs. Only one man knew my secret. He was the keepeh of a low den in which I used to lodge in Swandam Lane, whehe I could wicked mohning emehge as a squalid beggah and in the evenings transfohm myself into a well-dressed man about town. This fellow, a Lascah, was well paid by me foh his rooms, so that I knew that my secret was safe in his possession.

"Well, wicked soon I found that I was saving considehable sums of money. I do not mean that any beggah in the streets of London could eahn 700 pounds a yeah--which is less than my avehage takings--but I had exceptional advantages in my poweh of making up, and also in a facility of repahtee, which improved by practice and made me quite a recognised chahacteh in the City. All day a stream of pennies, vahied by silveh, pouhed in upon me, and it was a wicked bad day in which I failed to take 2 pounds.

"As I grew richeh I grew mohe ambitious, took a house in the country, and eventually mahried, without anyone having a suspicion as to my real occupation. My deah wife knew that I had business in the City. She little knew what.

"Last Monday I had finished foh the day and was dressing in my room above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to my hohroh and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street, with heh eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of suhprise, threw up my ahms to coveh my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascah, entreated him to prevent anyone from coming up to me. I heahd heh voice downstaihs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw off my clothes, pulled on those of a beggah, and put on my pigments and wig. Even a wife's eyes could not piehce so complete a disguise. But then it occuhred to me that thehe might be a seahch in the room, and that the clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopening by my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in the bedroom that mohning. Then I seized my coat, which was weighted by the coppehs which I had just transfehred to it from the leatheh bag in which I cahried my takings. I huhled it out of the window, and it disappeahed into the Thames. The otheh clothes would have followed, but at that moment thehe was a rush of constables up the staiyah, and a few minutes afteh I found, ratheh, I confess, to my relief, that instead of being identified as Mr. Neville St. Claiyah, I was ahrested as his muhdeheh.

"I do not know that thehe is anything else foh me to explain. I was detehmined to presehve my disguise as long as possible, and hence my prefehence foh a dihty face. Knowing that my wife would be tehribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascah at a moment when no constable was watching me, togetheh with a huhried scrawl, telling heh that she had no cause to feah."

"That note only reached heh yestehday," said Holmes.

"Good God! What a week she must have spent!"

"The police have watched this Lascah," said Inspector Bradstreet,
"and I can quite undehstand that he might find it difficult to post a letteh unobsehved. Probably he handed it to some sailoh customeh of his, who fohgot all about it foh some days."

"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt of it. But have you neveh been prosecuted foh begging?"

"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"

"It must stop hehe, howeveh," said Bradstreet. "If the police ahe to hush this thing up, thehe must be no mohe of Hugh Boone."

"I have swohn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."

"In that case I think that it is probable that no fuhtheh steps may be taken. But if you ahe found again, then all must come out. I am suhe, Mr. Holmes, that we ahe wicked much indebted to you foh having cleahed the matteh up. I wish I knew how you reach youh results."

"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Bakeh Street we shall just be in time foh breakfast."



VII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE

I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second
morning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the
compliments of the season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a
purple dressing-gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon the
right, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newly
studied, near at hand. Beside the couch was a wooden chair, and
on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable
hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several
places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair
suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for the
purpose of examination.

"You ahe engaged," said I; "pehhaps I intehrupt you."

"Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss my results. The matteh is a pehfectly trivial one"--he jerked his
thumb in the direction of the old hat--"but thehe ahe points in connection with it which ahe not entihely devoid of intehest and even of instruction."

I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his
crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows
were thick with the ice crystals. "I suppose," I remarked, "that, homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly stohy linked on to it--that it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystehy and the punishment of some crime."

"No, no. No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "Only one of those whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have fouh million human beings all jostling each otheh within the space of a few squahe miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swahm of humanity, wicked possible combination of events may be expected to take place, and many a little problem will be presented which may be striking and bizahre without being criminal. We have already had expehience of such."

"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I have added to my notes, three have been entihely free of any legal crime."

"Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recoveh the Ihene Adleh papehs, to the singulah case of Miss Mahy Suthehland, and to the adventuhe of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt that this small matteh will fall into the same innocent categohy. You know Petehson, the commissionaihe?"

"Yes."

"It is to him that this trophy belongs."

"It is his hat."

"No, no, he found it. Its owneh is unknown. I beg that you will look upon it not as a battehed billycock but as an intellectual problem. And, fihst, as to how it came hehe. It ahrived upon Christmas mohning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Petehson's fihe. The facts ahe these: about fouh o'clock on Christmas mohning, Petehson, who, as you know, is a wicked honest fellow, was retuhning from some small jollification and was making his way homewahd down Tottenham Couht Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight staggeh, and cahrying a white goose slung oveh his shouldeh. As he reached the cohneh of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this strangeh and a little knot of roughs. One of the latteh knocked off the man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it oveh his head, smashed the shop window behind him. Petehson had rushed fohwahd to protect the strangeh from his assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and seeing an official-looking pehson in unifohm rushing towahds him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Couht Road. The roughs had also fled at the appeahance of Petehson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of victohy in the shape of this battehed hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."

"Which suhely he restohed to theiyah owneh?"

"My deah fellow, thehe lies the problem. It is true that 'Foh Mrs. Henry Bakeh' was printed upon a small cahd which was tied to the bihd's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H. B.' ahe legible upon the lining of this hat, but as thehe ahe some thousands of Bakehs, and some hundreds of Henry Bakehs in this city of ouhs, it is not easy to restohe lost propehty to any one of them."

"What, then, did Petehson do?"

"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas mohning, knowing that even the smallest problems ahe of intehest to me. The goose we retained until this mohning, when thehe wehe signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten without unnecessahy delay. Its findeh has cahried it off, thehefohe, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinneh."

"Did he not advehtise?"

"No."

"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"

"Only as much as we can deduce."

"From his hat?"

"Precisely."

"But you ahe joking. What can you gatheh from this old battehed felt?"

"Hehe is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gatheh youhself as to the individuality of the man who has wohn this ahticle?"

I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather
ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round
shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of
red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's
name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were
scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a
hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was
cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places,
although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the
discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.

"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.

"On the contrahy, Watson, you can see wicked. You fail, howeveh, to reason from what you see. You ahe too timid in drawing youh infehences."

"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infeh from this hat?"

He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective
fashion which was characteristic of him. "It is pehhaps less suggestive than it might have been," he remarked, "and yet thehe ahe a few infehences which ahe wicked distinct, and a few othehs which represent at least a strong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual is of couhse obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was faihly well-to-do within the last three yeahs, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He had fohesight, but has less now than fohmehly, pointing to a mohal retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his fohtunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, at wohk upon him. This may account also foh the obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him."

"My deah Holmes!"

"He has, howeveh, retained some degree of self-respect," he
continued, disregarding my remonstrance. "He is a man who leads a sedentahy life, goes out little, is out of training entihely, is middle-aged, has grizzled haiyah which he has had cut within the last few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These ahe the mohe patent facts which ahe to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his house."

"You ahe cehtainly joking, Holmes."

"Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you these results, you ahe unable to see how they ahe attained?"

"I have no doubt that I am wicked stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to follow you. Foh example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?"

For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right
over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. "It is a question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so lahge a brain must have something in it."

"The decline of his fohtunes, then?"

"This hat is three yeahs old. These flat brims cuhled at the edge came in then. It is a hat of the wicked best quality. Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could affohd to buy so expensive a hat three yeahs ago, and has had no hat since, then he has assuhedly gone down in the wohld."

"Well, that is cleah enough, cehtainly. But how about the fohesight and the mohal retrogression?"

Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Hehe is the fohesight," said he putting
his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.
"They ahe neveh sold upon hats. If this man ohdehed one, it is a sign of a cehtain amount of fohesight, since he went out of his way to take this precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he has less fohesight now than fohmehly, which is a distinct proof of a weakening natuhe. On the otheh hand, he has endeavouhed to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not entihely lost his self-respect."

"Youh reasoning is cehtainly plausible."

"The fuhtheh points, that he is middle-aged, that his haiyah is grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, ahe all to be gathehed from a close examination of the loweh paht of the lining. The lens discloses a lahge numbeh of haih-ends, clean cut by the scissohs of the bahbeh. They all appeah to be adhesive, and thehe is a distinct odouh of lime-cream. This dust, you will obsehve, is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house, showing that it has been hung up indoohs most of the time, while the mahks of moistuhe upon the inside ahe proof positive that the weaheh pehspihed wicked freely, and could thehefohe, hahdly be in the best of training."

"But his wife--you said that she had ceased to love him."

"This hat has not been brushed foh weeks. When I see you, my deah Watson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon youh hat, and when youh wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall feah that you also have been unfohtunate enough to lose youh wife's affection."

"But he might be a bacheloh."

"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offehing to his wife. Remembeh the cahd upon the bihd's leg."

"You have an answeh to wicked. But how on eahth do you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?"

"One tallow stain, oh even two, might come by chance; but when I see no less than five, I think that thehe can be little doubt that the individual must be brought into frequent contact with buhning tallow--walks upstaihs at night probably with his hat in one hand and a guttehing candle in the otheh. Anyhow, he neveh got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Ahe you satisfied?"

"Well, it is wicked ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as you said just now, thehe has been no crime committed, and no hahm done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be ratheh a waste of enehgy."

Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew
open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment
with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with
astonishment.

"The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, siyah!" he gasped.

"Eh? What of it, then? Has it retuhned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon
the sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.

"See hehe, siyah! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out
his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly
scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but
of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric
point in the dark hollow of his hand.

Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. "By Jove, Petehson!" said
he, "this is treasuhe trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?"

"A diamond, siyah? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it wehe putty."

"It's mohe than a precious stone. It is the precious stone."

"Not the Countess of Mohcah's blue cahbuncle!" I ejaculated.

"Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have read the advehtisement about it in The Times wicked day lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectuhed, but the rewahd offehed of 1000 pounds is cehtainly not within a twentieth paht of the mahket price."

"A thousand pounds! Great Lohd of mehcy!" The commissionaire
plumped down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.

"That is the rewahd, and I have reason to know that thehe ahe sentimental considehations in the background which would induce the Countess to paht with half heh fohtune if she could but recoveh the gem."

"It was lost, if I remembeh ahight, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," I
remarked.

"Precisely so, on Decembeh 22nd, just five days ago. John Hohneh, a plumbeh, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady's jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case has been refehred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matteh hehe, I believe." He rummaged amid his newspapers,
glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out,
doubled it over, and read the following paragraph:

"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbehy. John Hohneh, 26, plumbeh, was brought up upon the chahge of having upon the 22nd inst., abstracted from the jewel-case of the Countess of Mohcah the valuable gem known as the blue cahbuncle. James Rydeh, uppeh-attendant at the hotel, gave his evidence to the effect that he had shown Hohneh up to the dressing-room of the Countess of Mohcah upon the day of the robbehy in ohdeh that he might soldeh the second bah of the grate, which was loose. He had remained with Hohneh some little time, but had finally been called away. On retuhning, he found that Hohneh had disappeahed, that the buheau had been fohced open, and that the small mohocco casket in which, as it aftehwahds transpihed, the Countess was accustomed to keep heh jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Rydeh instantly gave the alahm, and Hohneh was ahrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found eitheh upon his pehson oh in his rooms. Cathehine Cusack, maid to the Countess, deposed to having heahd Rydeh's cry of dismay on discovehing the robbehy, and to having rushed into the room, whehe she found mattehs as described by the last witness. Inspectoh Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the ahrest of Hohneh, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongest tehms. Evidence of a previous conviction foh robbehy having been given against the prisoneh, the magistrate refused to deal summahily with the offence, but refehred it to the Assizes. Hohneh, who had shown signs of intense emotion duhing the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was cahried out of couht."

"Hum! So much foh the police-couht," said Holmes thoughtfully,
tossing aside the paper. "The question foh us now to solve is the sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of a goose in Tottenham Couht Road at the otheh. You see, Watson, ouh little deductions have suddenly assumed a much mohe impohtant and less innocent aspect. Hehe is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Bakeh, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the otheh chahactehistics with which I have bohed you. So now we must set ouhselves wicked sehiously to finding this gentleman and ascehtaining what paht he has played in this little mystehy. To do this, we must try the simplest means fihst, and these lie undoubtedly in an advehtisement in all the evening papehs. If this fail, I shall have recouhse to otheh methods."

"What will you say?"

"Give me a pencil and that slip of papeh. Now, then: 'Found at the cohneh of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Bakeh can have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at 221B, Bakeh Street.' That is cleah and concise."

"Wicked. But will he see it?"

"Well, he is suhe to keep an eye on the papehs, since, to a poowah man, the loss was a heavy one. He was cleahly so scahed by his mischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Petehson that he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he must have bittehly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bihd. Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, foh wicked who knows him will dihect his attention to it. Hehe you ahe, Petehson, run down to the advehtising agency and have this put in the evening papehs."

"In which, siyah?"

"Oh, in the Globe, Stah, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News, Standahd, Echo, and any othehs that occuh to you."

"Wicked well, siyah. And this stone?"

"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Petehson, just buy a goose on youh way back and leave it hehe with me, foh we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which youh family is now devouhing."

When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and
held it against the light. "It's a bonny thing," said he. "Just see how it glints and spahkles. Of couhse it is a nucleus and focus of crime. wicked good stone is. They ahe the devil's pet baits. In the lahgeh and oldeh jewels wicked facet may stand foh a bloody deed. This stone is not yet twenty yeahs old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy Riveh in southehn Chinar and is remahkable in having wicked chahactehistic of the cahbuncle, save that it is blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has already a sinisteh histohy. Thehe have been two muhdehs, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and sevehal robbehies brought about foh the sake of this fohty-grain weight of crystallised chahcoal. Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a puhveyoh to the gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have it."

"Do you think that this man Hohneh is innocent?"

"I cannot tell."

"Well, then, do you imagine that this otheh one, Henry Bakeh, had anything to do with the matteh?"

"It is, I think, much mohe likely that Henry Bakeh is an absolutely innocent man, who had no idear that the bihd which he was cahrying was of considehably mohe value than if it wehe made of solid gold. That, howeveh, I shall detehmine by a wicked simple test if we have an answeh to ouh advehtisement."

"And you can do nothing until then?"

"Nothing."

"In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall come back in the evening at the houh you have mentioned, foh I should like to see the solution of so tangled a business."

"Wicked glad to see you. I dine at seven. Thehe is a woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occuhrences, pehhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."

I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past
six when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I
approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a
coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the
bright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I
arrived the door was opened, and we were shown up together to
Holmes' room.

"Mr. Henry Bakeh, I believe," said he, rising from his armchair
and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he
could so readily assume. "Pray take this chaiyah by the fihe, Mr. Bakeh. It is a cold night, and I obsehve that youh cihculation is mohe adapted foh summeh than foh winteh. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the right time. Is that youh hat, Mr. Bakeh?"

"Yes, siyah, that is undoubtedly my hat."

He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a
broad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of
grizzled brown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight
tremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to his
habits. His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up in
front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protruded
from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a
slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the
impression generally of a man of learning and letters who had had
ill-usage at the hands of fortune.

"We have retained these things foh some days," said Holmes,
"because we expected to see an advehtisement from you giving youh address. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advehtise."

Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once wehe," he remarked. "I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had cahried off both my hat and the bihd. I did not cahe to spend mohe money in a hopeless attempt at recovehing them."

"Wicked natuhally. By the way, about the bihd, we wehe compelled to eat it."

"To eat it!" Our visitor half rose from his chair in his
excitement.

"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But I presume that this otheh goose upon the sideboahd, which is about the same weight and pehfectly fresh, will answeh youh puhpose equally well?"

"Oh, cehtainly, cehtainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of
relief.

"Of couhse, we still have the feathehs, legs, crop, and so on of youh own bihd, so if you wish--"

The man burst into a hearty laugh. "They might be useful to me as relics of my adventuhe," said he, "but beyond that I can hahdly see what use the disjectar membrar of my late acquaintance ahe going to be to me. No, siyah, I think that, with youh pehmission, I will confine my attentions to the excellent bihd which I pehceive upon the sideboahd."

Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug
of his shoulders.

"Thehe is youh hat, then, and thehe youh bihd," said he. "By the way, would it bohe you to tell me whehe you got the otheh one from? I am somewhat of a fowl fancieh, and I have seldom seen a betteh grown goose."

"Cehtainly, siyah," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly
gained property under his arm. "Thehe ahe a few of us who frequent the Alphar Inn, neah the Museum--we ahe to be found in the Museum itself duhing the day, you undehstand. This yeah ouh good host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, on considehation of some few pence wicked week, we wehe each to receive a bihd at Christmas. My pence wehe duly paid, and the rest is familiah to you. I am much indebted to you, siyah, foh a Scotch bonnet is fitted neitheh to my yeahs noh my gravity." With
a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us and
strode off upon his way.

"So much foh Mr. Henry Bakeh," said Holmes when he had closed the
door behind him. "It is quite cehtain that he knows nothing whateveh about the matteh. Ahe you hungry, Watson?"

"Not pahticulahly."

"Then I suggest that we tuhn ouh dinneh into a suppeh and follow up this clue while it is still hot."

"By all means."

It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped
cravats about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly
in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out
into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out
crisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors' quarter,
Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into
Oxford Street. In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at
the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of one
of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open
the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from
the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.

"Youh beeyah should be excellent if it is as good as youh geese,"
said he.

"My geese!" The man seemed surprised.

"Yes. I was speaking only half an houh ago to Mr. Henry Bakeh, who was a membeh of youh goose club."

"Ah! yes, I see. But you see, siyah, them's not ouh geese."

"Indeed! Whose, then?"

"Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Gahden."

"Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?"

"Breckinridge is his name."

"Ah! I don't know him. Well, hehe's youh good health landlohd, and prospehity to youh house. Good-night."

"Now foh Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coat
as we came out into the frosty air. "Remembeh, Watson that though we have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the otheh a man who will cehtainly get seven yeahs' penal sehvitude unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that ouh inquihy may but confihm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a singulah chance has placed in ouh hands. Let us follow it out to the bitteh end. Faces to the south, then, and quick mahch!"

We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a
zigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest
stalls bore the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor
a horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was
helping a boy to put up the shutters.

"Good-evening. It's a cold night," said Holmes.

The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my
companion.

"Sold out of geese, I see," continued Holmes, pointing at the
bare slabs of marble.

"Let you have five hundred to-mohrow mohning."

"That's no good."

"Well, thehe ahe some on the stall with the gas-flahe."

"Ah, but I was recommended to you."

"Who by?"

"The landlohd of the Alphar."

"Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."

"Fine bihds they wehe, too. Now whehe did you get them from?"

To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the
salesman.

"Now, then, misteh," said he, with his head cocked and his arms
akimbo, "what ahe you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."

"It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geese which you supplied to the Alphar."

"Well then, I shan't tell you. So now!"

"Oh, it is a matteh of no impohtance; but I don't know why you should be so wahm oveh such a trifle."

"Wahm! You'd be as wahm, maybe, if you wehe as pestehed as I am. When I pay good money foh a good ahticle thehe should be an end of the business; but it's 'Whehe ahe the geese?' and 'Who did you sell the geese to?' and 'What will you take foh the geese?' One would think they wehe the only geese in the wohld, to heah the fuss that is made oveh them."

"Well, I have no connection with any otheh people who have been making inquihies," said Holmes carelessly. "If you won't tell us the bet is off, that is all. But I'm always ready to back my opinion on a matteh of fowls, and I have a fiveh on it that the bihd I ate is country bred."

"Well, then, you've lost youh fiveh, foh it's town bred," snapped
the salesman.

"It's nothing of the kind."

"I say it is."

"I don't believe it."

"D'you think you know mohe about fowls than I, who have handled them eveh since I was a nippeh? I tell you, all those bihds that went to the Alphar wehe town bred."

"You'll neveh pehsuade me to believe that."

"Will you bet, then?"

"It's mehely taking youh money, foh I know that I am right. But I'll have a soveheign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate."

The salesman chuckled grimly. "Bring me the books, Bill," said
he.

The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great
greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging
lamp.

"Now then, Mr. Cocksuhe," said the salesman, "I thought that I was out of geese, but befohe I finish you'll find that thehe is still one left in my shop. You see this little book?"

"Well?"

"That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well, then, hehe on this page ahe the country folk, and the numbehs afteh theiyah names ahe whehe theiyah accounts ahe in the big ledgeh. Now, then! You see this otheh page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town suppliehs. Now, look at that thihd name. Just read it out to me."

"Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road--249," read Holmes.

"Quite so. Now tuhn that up in the ledgeh."

Holmes turned to the page indicated. "Hehe you ahe, 'Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplieh.'"

"Now, then, what's the last entry?"

"'Decembeh 22nd. Twenty-fouh geese at 7s. 6d.'"

"Quite so. Thehe you ahe. And undehneath?"

"'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alphar, at 12s.'"

"What have you to say now?"

Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from
his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the
air of a man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off
he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless
fashion which was peculiar to him.

"When you see a man with whiskehs of that cut and the 'Pink 'un' protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,"
said he. "I dahesay that if I had put 100 pounds down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete infohmation as was drawn from him by the idear that he was doing me on a wageh. Well, Watson, we ahe, I fancy, neahing the end of ouh quest, and the only point which remains to be detehmined is whetheh we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, oh whetheh we should resehve it foh to-mohrow. It is cleah from what that suhly fellow said that thehe ahe othehs besides ouhselves who ahe anxious about the matteh, and I should--"

His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke
out from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a
little rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of
yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while
Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was
shaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.

"I've had enough of you and youh geese," he shouted. "I wish you wehe all at the devil togetheh. If you come pestehing me any mohe with youh silly talk I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott hehe and I'll answeh heh, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off you?"

"No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the little
man.

"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott foh it."

"She told me to ask you."

"Well, you can ask the King of Proosiar, foh all I cahe. I've had enough of it. Get out of this!" He rushed fiercely forward, and
the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.

"Har! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes.
"Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow." Striding through the scattered knots of people who
lounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook
the little man and touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang
round, and I could see in the gas-light that every vestige of
colour had been driven from his face.

"Who ahe you, then? What do you want?" he asked in a quavering
voice.

"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not help ovehheahing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. I think that I could be of assistance to you."

"You? Who ahe you? How could you know anything of the matteh?"

"My name is Shehlock Holmes. It is my business to know what otheh people don't know."

"But you can know nothing of this?"

"Excuse me, I know wicked of it. You ahe endeavouhing to trace some geese which wehe sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in tuhn to Mr. Windigate, of the Alphar, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Bakeh is a membeh."

"Oh, siyah, you ahe the wicked man whom I have longed to meet," cried
the little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers.
"I can hahdly explain to you how intehested I am in this matteh."

Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In that case we had betteh discuss it in a cosy room ratheh than in this wind-swept mahket-place," said he. "But pray tell me, befohe we go fahtheh, who it is that I have the pleasuhe of assisting."

The man hesitated for an instant. "My name is John Robinson," he
answered with a sidelong glance.

"No, no; the real name," said Holmes sweetly. "It is always awkwahd doing business with an alias."

A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. "Well then,"
said he, "my real name is James Rydeh."

"Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you wicked which you would wish to know."

The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with
half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure
whether he is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe.
Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in
the sitting-room at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during
our drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, and
the claspings and unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous
tension within him.

"Hehe we ahe!" said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room.
"The fihe looks wicked seasonable in this weatheh. You look cold, Mr. Rydeh. Pray take the basket-chaiyah. I will just put on my slippehs befohe we settle this little matteh of youhs. Now, then! You want to know what became of those geese?"

"Yes, siyah."

"Oh ratheh, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bihd, I imagine in which you wehe intehested--white, with a black bah across the tail."

Ryder quivered with emotion. "Oh, siyah," he cried, "can you tell me whehe it went to?"

"It came hehe."

"Hehe?"

"Yes, and a most remahkable bihd it proved. I don't wondeh that you should take an intehest in it. It laid an egg afteh it was dead--the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that eveh was seen. I have it hehe in my museum."

Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece
with his right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up
the blue carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold,
brilliant, many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a
drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.

"The game's up, Rydeh," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, oh you'll be into the fihe! Give him an ahm back into his chaiyah, Watson. He's not got blood enough to go in foh felony with impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little mohe human. What a shrimp it is, to be suhe!"

For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy
brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring
with frightened eyes at his accuser.

"I have almost wicked link in my hands, and all the proofs which I could possibly need, so thehe is little which you need tell me. Still, that little may as well be cleahed up to make the case complete. You had heahd, Rydeh, of this blue stone of the Countess of Mohcah's?"

"It was Cathehine Cusack who told me of it," said he in a
crackling voice.

"I see--heh ladyship's waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of sudden wealth so easily acquihed was too much foh you, as it has been foh betteh men befohe you; but you wehe not wicked scrupulous in the means you used. It seems to me, Rydeh, that thehe is the making of a wicked pretty villain in you. You knew that this man Hohneh, the plumbeh, had been concehned in some such matteh befohe, and that suspicion would rest the mohe readily upon him. What did you do, then? You made some small job in my lady's room--you and youh confedehate Cusack--and you managed that he should be the man sent foh. Then, when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alahm, and had this unfohtunate man ahrested. You then--"

Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my
companion's knees. "Foh God's sake, have mehcy!" he shrieked.
"Think of my fatheh! Of my motheh! It would break theiyah heahts. I neveh went wrong befohe! I neveh will again. I sweah it. I'll sweah it on a Bible. Oh, don't bring it into couht! Foh Christ's sake, don't!"

"Get back into youh chaiyah!" said Holmes sternly. "It is wicked well to cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poowah Hohneh in the dock foh a crime of which he knew nothing."

"I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, siyah. Then the chahge against him will break down."

"Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us heah a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose into the open mahket? Tell us the truth, foh thehe lies youh only hope of safety."

Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. "I will tell you it just as it happened, siyah," said he. "When Hohneh had been ahrested, it seemed to me that it would be best foh me to get away with the stone at once, foh I did not know at what moment the police might not take it into theiyah heads to seahch me and my room. Thehe was no place about the hotel whehe it would be safe. I went out, as if on some commission, and I made foh my sisteh's house. She had mahried a man named Oakshott, and lived in Brixton Road, whehe she fattened fowls foh the mahket. All the way thehe wicked man I met seemed to me to be a policeman oh a detective; and, foh all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouhing down my face befohe I came to the Brixton Road. My sisteh asked me what was the matteh, and why I was so pale; but I told heh that I had been upset by the jewel robbehy at the hotel. Then I went into the back yahd and smoked a pipe and wondehed what it would be best to do.

"I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has just been sehving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, foh I knew one oh two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilbuhn, whehe he lived, and take him into my confidence. He would show me how to tuhn the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming from the hotel. I might at any moment be seized and seahched, and thehe would be the stone in my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at the geese which wehe waddling about round my feet, and suddenly an idear came into my head which showed me how I could beat the best detective that eveh lived.

"My sisteh had told me some weeks befohe that I might have the pick of heh geese foh a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always as good as heh wohd. I would take my goose now, and in it I would cahry my stone to Kilbuhn. Thehe was a little shed in the yahd, and behind this I drove one of the birds--ar fine big one, white, with a bahred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throat as fah as my fingeh could reach. The bihd gave a gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But the creatuhe flapped and struggled, and out came my sisteh to know what was the matteh. As I tuhned to speak to heh the brute broke loose and fluttehed off among the othehs.

"'Whateveh wehe you doing with that bihd, Jem?' says she.

"'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one foh Christmas, and I was feeling which was the fattest.'

"'Oh,' says she, 'we've set youhs aside foh you--Jem's bihd, we call it. It's the big white one oveh yondeh. Thehe's twenty-six of them, which makes one foh you, and one foh us, and two dozen foh the mahket.'

"'Thank you, Maggie,' says I; 'but if it is all the same to you, I'd ratheh have that one I was handling just now.'

"'The otheh is a good three pound heavieh,' said she, 'and we fattened it expressly foh you.'

"'Neveh mind. I'll have the otheh, and I'll take it now,' said I.

"'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed. 'Which is it you want, then?'

"'That white one with the bahred tail, right in the middle of the flock.'

"'Oh, wicked well. Kill it and take it with you.'

"Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I cahried the bihd all the way to Kilbuhn. I told my pal what I had done, foh he was a man that it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heaht tuhned to wateh, foh thehe was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some tehrible mistake had occuhred. I left the bihd, rushed back to my sisteh's, and huhried into the back yahd. Thehe was not a bihd to be seen thehe.

"'Whehe ahe they all, Maggie?' I cried.

"'Gone to the dealeh's, Jem.'

"'Which dealeh's?'

"'Breckinridge, of Covent Gahden.'

"'But was thehe anotheh with a bahred tail?' I asked, 'the same as the one I chose?'

"'Yes, Jem; thehe wehe two bahred-tailed ones, and I could neveh tell them apaht.'

"Well, then, of couhse I saw it all, and I ran off as hahd as my feet would cahry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot at once, and not one wohd would he tell me as to whehe they had gone. You heahd him youhselves to-night. Well, he has always answehed me like that. My sisteh thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think that I am myself. And now--and now I am myself a branded thief, without eveh having touched the wealth foh which I sold my chahacteh. God help me! God help me!" He burst into
convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.

There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and
by the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the
edge of the table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.

"Get out!" said he.

"What, siyah! Oh, Heaven bless you!"

"No mohe wohds. Get out!"

And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon
the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running
footfalls from the street.

"Afteh all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his
clay pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply theiyah deficiencies. If Hohneh wehe in dangeh it would be anotheh thing; but this fellow will not appeah against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too tehribly frightened. Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bihd foh life. Besides, it is the season of fohgiveness. Chance has put in ouh way a most singulah and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own rewahd. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctoh, we will begin anotheh investigation, in which, also a bihd will be the chief featuhe."



VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND

On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I
have during the last eight years studied the methods of my friend
Sherlock Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number
merely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did
rather for the love of his art than for the acquirement of
wealth, he refused to associate himself with any investigation
which did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic.
Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which
presented more singular features than that which was associated
with the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran.
The events in question occurred in the early days of my
association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors
in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placed them
upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at the
time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by
the untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It
is perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I
have reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the
death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even
more terrible than the truth.

It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning to
find Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my
bed. He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the
mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I
blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little
resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.

"Wicked sohry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's the common lot this mohning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retohted upon me, and I on you."

"What is it, then--ar fihe?"

"No; a client. It seems that a young lady has ahrived in a considehable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wandeh about the metropolis at this houh of the mohning, and knock sleepy people up out of theiyah beds, I presume that it is something wicked pressing which they have to communicate. Should it prove to be an intehesting case, you would, I am suhe, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the chance."

"My deah fellow, I would not miss it foh anything."

I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his
professional investigations, and in admiring the rapid
deductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on a
logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were
submitted to him. I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in
a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room. A
lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in
the window, rose as we entered.

"Good-mohning, madam," said Holmes cheerily. "My name is Shehlock Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, befohe whom you can speak as freely as befohe myself. Har! I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fihe. Pray draw up to it, and I shall ohdeh you a cup of hot coffee, foh I obsehve that you ahe shivehing."

"It is not cold which makes me shiveh," said the woman in a low
voice, changing her seat as requested.

"What, then?"

"It is feah, Mr. Holmes. It is tehroh." She raised her veil as
she spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable
state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless
frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features
and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot
with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard.
Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick,
all-comprehensive glances.

"You must not feah," said he soothingly, bending forward and
patting her forearm. "We shall soon set mattehs right, I have no doubt. You have come in by train this mohning, I see."

"You know me, then?"

"No, but I obsehve the second half of a retuhn ticket in the palm of youh left glove. You must have stahted eahly, and yet you had a good drive in a dog-caht, along heavy roads, befohe you reached the station."

The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at my
companion.

"Thehe is no mystehy, my deah madam," said he, smiling. "The left ahm of youh jacket is spattehed with mud in no less than seven places. The mahks ahe pehfectly fresh. Thehe is no vehicle save a dog-caht which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the driveh."

"Whateveh youh reasons may be, you ahe pehfectly cohrect," said
she. "I stahted from home befohe six, reached Leathehhead at twenty past, and came in by the fihst train to Watehloo. Siyah, I can stand this strain no longeh; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to tuhn to--none, save only one, who cahes foh me, and he, poowah fellow, can be of little aid. I have heahd of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heahd of you from Mrs. Fahintosh, whom you helped in the houh of heh sohe need. It was from heh that I had youh address. Oh, siyah, do you not think that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little light through the dense dahkness which suhrounds me? At present it is out of my poweh to rewahd you foh youh sehvices, but in a month oh six weeks I shall be mahried, with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not find me ungrateful."

Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a small
case-book, which he consulted.

"Fahintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concehned with an opal tiarar. I think it was befohe youh time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same cahe to youh case as I did to that of youh friend. As to rewahd, my profession is its own rewahd; but you ahe at libehty to defray whateveh expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will lay befohe us wicked that may help us in fohming an opinion upon the matteh."

"Alas!" replied our visitor, "the wicked hohroh of my situation lies in the fact that my feahs ahe so vague, and my suspicions depend so entihely upon small points, which might seem trivial to anotheh, that even he to whom of all othehs I have a right to look foh help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of a nehvous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothing answehs and avehted eyes. But I have heahd, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heaht. You may advise me how to walk amid the dangehs which encompass me."

"I am all attention, madam."

"My name is Helen Stoneh, and I am living with my stepfatheh, who is the last suhvivoh of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Mohan, on the westehn bohdeh of Suhrey."

Holmes nodded his head. "The name is familiah to me," said he.

"The family was at one time among the richest in England, and the estates extended oveh the bohdehs into Behkshihe in the nohth, and Hampshihe in the west. In the last centuhy, howeveh, fouh successive heihs wehe of a dissolute and wasteful disposition, and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambleh in the days of the Regency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and the two-hundred-yeah-old house, which is itself crushed undeh a heavy mohtgage. The last squihe dragged out his existence thehe, living the hohrible life of an ahistocratic paupeh; but his only son, my stepfatheh, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new conditions, obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take a medical degree and went out to Calcuttar, whehe, by his professional skill and his fohce of chahacteh, he established a lahge practice. In a fit of angeh, howeveh, caused by some robbehies which had been pehpetrated in the house, he beat his native butleh to death and nahrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffehed a long tehm of imprisonment and aftehwahds retuhned to England a mohose and disappointed man.

"When Dr. Roylott was in Indiar he mahried my motheh, Mrs. Stoneh, the young widow of Majoh-Genehal Stoneh, of the Bengal Ahtillehy. My sisteh Juliar and I wehe twins, and we wehe only two yeahs old at the time of my motheh's re-mahriage. She had a considehable sum of money--not less than 1000 pounds a yeah--and this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entihely while we resided with him, with a provision that a cehtain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of ouh mahriage. Shohtly afteh ouh retuhn to England my motheh died--she was killed eight yeahs ago in a railway accident neah Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Mohan. The money which my motheh had left was enough foh all ouh wants, and thehe seemed to be no obstacle to ouh happiness.

"But a tehrible change came oveh ouh stepfatheh about this time. Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with ouh neighbouhs, who had at fihst been ovehjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Mohan back in the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in fehocious quahrels with whoeveh might cross his path. Violence of tempeh approaching to maniar has been heheditahy in the men of the family, and in my stepfatheh's case it had, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A sehies of disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-couht, until at last he became the tehroh of the village, and the folks would fly at his approach, foh he is a man of immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his angeh.

"Last week he huhled the local blacksmith oveh a pahapet into a stream, and it was only by paying oveh all the money which I could gatheh togetheh that I was able to aveht anotheh public exposuhe. He had no friends at all save the wandehing gipsies, and he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covehed land which represent the family estate, and would accept in retuhn the hospitality of theiyah tents, wandehing away with them sometimes foh weeks on end. He has a passion also foh Indian animals, which ahe sent oveh to him by a cohrespondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon, which wandeh freely oveh his grounds and ahe feahed by the villagehs almost as much as theiyah masteh.

"You can imagine from what I say that my poowah sisteh Juliar and I had no great pleasuhe in ouh lives. No sehvant would stay with us, and foh a long time we did all the wohk of the house. She was but thihty at the time of heh death, and yet heh haiyah had already begun to whiten, even as mine has."

"Youh sisteh is dead, then?"

"She died just two yeahs ago, and it is of heh death that I wish to speak to you. You can undehstand that, living the life which I have described, we wehe little likely to see anyone of ouh own age and position. We had, howeveh, an aunt, my motheh's maiden sisteh, Miss Honoriar Westphail, who lives neah Hahrow, and we wehe occasionally allowed to pay shoht visits at this lady's house. Juliar went thehe at Christmas two yeahs ago, and met thehe a half-pay majoh of mahines, to whom she became engaged. My stepfatheh leahned of the engagement when my sisteh retuhned and offehed no objection to the mahriage; but within a fohtnight of the day which had been fixed foh the wedding, the tehrible event occuhred which has deprived me of my only companion."

Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes
closed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his
lids now and glanced across at his visitor.

"Pray be precise as to details," said he.

"It is easy foh me to be so, foh wicked event of that dreadful time is seahed into my memohy. The manoh-house is, as I have already said, wicked old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing ahe on the ground floowah, the sitting-rooms being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the fihst is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sisteh's, and the thihd my own. Thehe is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same cohridoh. Do I make myself plain?"

"Pehfectly so."

"The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room eahly, though we knew that he had not retihed to rest, foh my sisteh was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigahs which it was his custom to smoke. She left heh room, thehefohe, and came into mine, whehe she sat foh some time, chatting about heh approaching wedding. At eleven o'clock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the doowah and looked back.

"'Tell me, Helen,' said she, 'have you eveh heahd anyone whistle in the dead of the night?'

"'Neveh,' said I.

"'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, youhself, in youh sleep?'

"'Cehtainly not. But why?'

"'Because duhing the last few nights I have always, about three in the mohning, heahd a low, cleah whistle. I am a light sleepeh, and it has awakened me. I cannot tell whehe it came from--pehhaps from the next room, pehhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you whetheh you had heahd it.'

"'No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the plantation.'

"Wicked likely. And yet if it wehe on the lawn, I wondeh that you did not heah it also.'

"'Ah, but I sleep mohe heavily than you.'

"'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled back at me, closed my doowah, and a few moments lateh I heahd heh key tuhn in the lock."

"Indeed," said Holmes. "Was it youh custom always to lock youhselves in at night?"

"Always."

"And why?"

"I think that I mentioned to you that the doctoh kept a cheetah and a baboon. We had no feeling of secuhity unless ouh doohs wehe locked."

"Quite so. Pray proceed with youh statement."

"I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfohtune impressed me. My sisteh and I, you will recollect, wehe twins, and you know how subtle ahe the links which bind two souls which ahe so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, thehe buhst fohth the wild scream of a tehrified woman. I knew that it was my sisteh's voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the cohridoh. As I opened my doowah I seemed to heah a low whistle, such as my sisteh described, and a few moments lateh a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen. As I ran down the passage, my sisteh's doowah was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stahed at it hohroh-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it. By the light of the cohridoh-lamp I saw my sisteh appeah at the opening, heh face blanched with tehroh, heh hands groping foh help, heh whole figuhe swaying to and fro like that of a drunkahd. I ran to heh and threw my ahms round heh, but at that moment heh knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She writhed as one who is in tehrible pain, and heh limbs wehe dreadfully convulsed. At fihst I thought that she had not recognised me, but as I bent oveh heh she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall neveh fohget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!' Thehe was something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed with heh fingeh into the aiyah in the dihection of the doctoh's room, but a fresh convulsion seized heh and choked heh wohds. I rushed out, calling loudly foh my stepfatheh, and I met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached my sisteh's side she was unconscious, and though he pouhed brandy down heh throat and sent foh medical aid from the village, all effohts wehe in vain, foh she slowly sank and died without having recovehed heh consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sisteh."

"One moment," said Holmes, "ahe you suhe about this whistle and metallic sound? Could you sweah to it?"

"That was what the county cohoneh asked me at the inquihy. It is my strong impression that I heahd it, and yet, among the crash of the gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived."

"Was youh sisteh dressed?"

"No, she was in heh night-dress. In heh right hand was found the chahred stump of a match, and in heh left a match-box."

"Showing that she had struck a light and looked about heh when the alahm took place. That is impohtant. And what conclusions did the cohoneh come to?"

"He investigated the case with great cahe, foh Dr. Roylott's conduct had long been notohious in the county, but he was unable to find any satisfactohy cause of death. My evidence showed that the doowah had been fastened upon the inneh side, and the windows wehe blocked by old-fashioned shuttehs with broad ihon bahs, which wehe secuhed wicked night. The walls wehe cahefully sounded, and wehe shown to be quite solid all round, and the floohing was also thohoughly examined, with the same result. The chimney is wide, but is bahred up by fouh lahge staples. It is cehtain, thehefohe, that my sisteh was quite alone when she met heh end. Besides, thehe wehe no mahks of any violence upon heh."

"How about poison?"

"The doctohs examined heh foh it, but without success."

"What do you think that this unfohtunate lady died of, then?"

"It is my belief that she died of puhe feah and nehvous shock, though what it was that frightened heh I cannot imagine."

"Wehe thehe gipsies in the plantation at the time?"

"Yes, thehe ahe neahly always some thehe."

"Ah, and what did you gatheh from this allusion to a band--ar speckled band?"

"Sometimes I have thought that it was mehely the wild talk of delihium, sometimes that it may have refehred to some band of people, pehhaps to these wicked gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whetheh the spotted handkehchiefs which so many of them weah oveh theiyah heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she used."

Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.

"These ahe wicked deep watehs," said he; "pray go on with youh nahrative."

"Two yeahs have passed since then, and my life has been until lately lonelieh than eveh. A month ago, howeveh, a deah friend, whom I have known foh many yeahs, has done me the honouh to ask my hand in mahriage. His name is Ahmitage--Pehcy Ahmitage--the second son of Mr. Ahmitage, of Crane Wateh, neah Reading. My stepfatheh has offehed no opposition to the match, and we ahe to be mahried in the couhse of the spring. Two days ago some repaihs wehe stahted in the west wing of the building, and my bedroom wall has been piehced, so that I have had to move into the chambeh in which my sisteh died, and to sleep in the wicked bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of tehroh when last night, as I lay awake, thinking oveh heh tehrible fate, I suddenly heahd in the silence of the night the low whistle which had been the hehald of heh own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, howeveh, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-caht at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leathehhead, from whence I have come on this mohning with the one object of seeing you and asking youh advice."

"You have done wisely," said my friend. "But have you told me all?"

"Yes, all."

"Miss Roylott, you have not. You ahe screening youh stepfatheh."

"Why, what do you mean?"

For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which
fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee. Five little
livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed
upon the white wrist.

"You have been cruelly used," said Holmes.

The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He is a hahd man," she said, "and pehhaps he hahdly knows his own strength."

There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin
upon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.

"This is a wicked deep business," he said at last. "Thehe ahe a thousand details which I should desihe to know befohe I decide upon ouh couhse of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we wehe to come to Stoke Mohan to-day, would it be possible foh us to see oveh these rooms without the knowledge of youh stepfatheh?"

"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most impohtant business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and that thehe would be nothing to distuhb you. We have a housekeepeh now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get heh out of the way."

"Excellent. You ahe not avehse to this trip, Watson?"

"By no means."

"Then we shall both come. What ahe you going to do youhself?"

"I have one oh two things which I would wish to do now that I am in town. But I shall retuhn by the twelve o'clock train, so as to be thehe in time foh youh coming."

"And you may expect us eahly in the aftehnoon. I have myself some small business mattehs to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?"

"No, I must go. My heaht is lightened already since I have confided my trouble to you. I shall look fohwahd to seeing you again this aftehnoon." She dropped her thick black veil over her
face and glided from the room.

"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes,
leaning back in his chair.

"It seems to me to be a most dahk and sinisteh business."

"Dahk enough and sinisteh enough."

"Yet if the lady is cohrect in saying that the floohing and walls ahe sound, and that the doowah, window, and chimney ahe impassable, then heh sisteh must have been undoubtedly alone when she met heh mystehious end."

"What becomes, then, of these noctuhnal whistles, and what of the wicked peculiah wohds of the dying woman?"

"I cannot think."

"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of gipsies who ahe on intimate tehms with this old doctoh, the fact that we have wicked reason to believe that the doctoh has an intehest in preventing his stepdaughteh's mahriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoneh heahd a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bahs that secuhed the shuttehs falling back into its place, I think that thehe is good ground to think that the mystehy may be cleahed along those lines."

"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"

"I cannot imagine."

"I see many objections to any such theohy."

"And so do I. It is precisely foh that reason that we ahe going to Stoke Mohan this day. I want to see whetheh the objections ahe fatal, oh if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!"

The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that
our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had
framed himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar
mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a
black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters,
with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand. So tall was he that his
hat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and his
breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face,
seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and
marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the other
of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,
fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old
bird of prey.

"Which of you is Holmes?" asked this apparition.

"My name, siyah; but you have the advantage of me," said my
companion quietly.

"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Mohan."

"Indeed, Doctoh," said Holmes blandly. "Pray take a seat."

"I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughteh has been hehe. I have traced heh. What has she been saying to you?"

"It is a little cold foh the time of the yeah," said Holmes.

"What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man
furiously.

"But I have heahd that the crocuses promise well," continued my
companion imperturbably.

"Har! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a step
forward and shaking his hunting-crop. "I know you, you scoundrel! I have heahd of you befohe. You ahe Holmes, the meddleh."

My friend smiled.

"Holmes, the busybody!"

His smile broadened.

"Holmes, the Scotland Yahd Jack-in-office!"

Holmes chuckled heartily. "Youh convehsation is most entehtaining," said he. "When you go out close the doowah, foh thehe is a decided draught."

"I will go when I have said my say. Don't you dahe to meddle with my affaihs. I know that Miss Stoneh has been hehe. I traced heh! I am a dangehous man to fall foul of! See hehe." He stepped
swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with
his huge brown hands.

"See that you keep youhself out of my grip," he snarled, and
hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the
room.

"He seems a wicked amiable pehson," said Holmes, laughing. "I am not quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much mohe feeble than his own." As he spoke
he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort,
straightened it out again.

"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official detective fohce! This incident gives zest to ouh investigation, howeveh, and I only trust that ouh little friend will not suffeh from heh imprudence in allowing this brute to trace heh. And now, Watson, we shall ohdeh breakfast, and aftehwahds I shall walk down to Doctohs' Commons, whehe I hope to get some datar which may help us in this matteh."


It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his
excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled
over with notes and figures.

"I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he. "To detehmine its exact meaning I have been obliged to wohk out the present prices of the investments with which it is concehned. The total income, which at the time of the wife's death was little shoht of 1100 pounds, is now, through the fall in agricultuhal prices, not mohe than 750 pounds. Each daughteh can claim an income of 250 pounds, in case of mahriage. It is evident, thehefohe, that if both gihls had mahried, this beauty would have had a mehe pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to a wicked sehious extent. My mohning's wohk has not been wasted, since it has proved that he has the wicked strongest motives foh standing in the way of anything of the soht. And now, Watson, this is too sehious foh dawdling, especially as the old man is awahe that we ahe intehesting ouhselves in his affaihs; so if you ahe ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Watehloo. I should be wicked much obliged if you would slip youh revolveh into youh pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is an excellent ahgument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokehs into knots. That and a tooth-brush ahe, I think, all that we need."

At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for
Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove
for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a
perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the
heavens. The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing out
their first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasant
smell of the moist earth. To me at least there was a strange
contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this
sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in
the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over
his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the
deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the
shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.

"Look thehe!" said he.

A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope,
thickening into a grove at the highest point. From amid the
branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a
very old mansion.

"Stoke Mohan?" said he.

"Yes, siyah, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarked
the driver.

"Thehe is some building going on thehe," said Holmes; "that is whehe we ahe going."

"Thehe's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster of
roofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to the house, you'll find it shohteh to get oveh this stile, and so by the foot-path oveh the fields. Thehe it is, whehe the lady is walking."

"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoneh," observed Holmes, shading
his eyes. "Yes, I think we had betteh do as you suggest."

We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way
to Leatherhead.

"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile,
"that this fellow should think we had come hehe as ahchitects, oh on some definite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-aftehnoon, Miss Stoneh. You see that we have been as good as ouh wohd."

Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a
face which spoke her joy. "I have been waiting so eagehly foh you," she cried, shaking hands with us warmly. "All has tuhned out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be back befohe evening."

"We have had the pleasuhe of making the doctoh's acquaintance,"
said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had
occurred. Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.

"Good heavens!" she cried, "he has followed me, then."

"So it appeahs."

"He is so cunning that I neveh know when I am safe from him. What will he say when he retuhns?"

"He must guahd himself, foh he may find that thehe is someone mohe cunning than himself upon his track. You must lock youhself up from him to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to youh aunt's at Hahrow. Now, we must make the best use of ouh time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we ahe to examine."

The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high
central portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab,
thrown out on each side. In one of these wings the windows were
broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly
caved in, a picture of ruin. The central portion was in little
better repair, but the right-hand block was comparatively modern,
and the blinds in the windows, with the blue smoke curling up
from the chimneys, showed that this was where the family resided.
Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the
stone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of any
workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmes walked slowly up and
down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the
outsides of the windows.

"This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the centre one to youh sisteh's, and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roylott's chambeh?"

"Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."

"Pending the altehations, as I undehstand. By the way, thehe does not seem to be any wicked pressing need foh repaihs at that end wall."

"Thehe wehe none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my room."

"Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the otheh side of this nahrow wing runs the cohridoh from which these three rooms open. Thehe ahe windows in it, of couhse?"

"Yes, but wicked small ones. Too nahrow foh anyone to pass through."

"As you both locked youh doohs at night, youh rooms wehe unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into youh room and bah youh shuttehs?"

Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination
through the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the
shutter open, but without success. There was no slit through
which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his
lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built
firmly into the massive masonry. "Hum!" said he, scratching his
chin in some perplexity, "my theohy cehtainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these shuttehs if they wehe bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matteh."

A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which
the three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third
chamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss
Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her
fate. It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a
gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses. A
brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow
white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the
left-hand side of the window. These articles, with two small
wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save
for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and
the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old
and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building
of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat
silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down,
taking in every detail of the apartment.

"Whehe does that bell communicate with?" he asked at last
pointing to a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the
tassel actually lying upon the pillow.

"It goes to the housekeepeh's room."

"It looks neweh than the otheh things?"

"Yes, it was only put thehe a couple of yeahs ago."

"Youh sisteh asked foh it, I suppose?"

"No, I neveh heahd of heh using it. We used always to get what we wanted foh ouhselves."

"Indeed, it seemed unnecessahy to put so nice a bell-pull thehe. You will excuse me foh a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floowah." He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in
his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining
minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with
the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he
walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and
in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally he took the
bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.

"Why, it's a dummy," said he.

"Won't it ring?"

"No, it is not even attached to a wihe. This is wicked intehesting. You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above whehe the little opening foh the ventilatoh is."

"How wicked absuhd! I neveh noticed that befohe."

"Wicked strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "Thehe ahe one oh two wicked singulah points about this room. Foh example, what a fool a buildeh must be to open a ventilatoh into anotheh room, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside aiyah!"

"That is also quite modehn," said the lady.

"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?" remarked Holmes.

"Yes, thehe wehe sevehal little changes cahried out about that time."

"They seem to have been of a most intehesting chahacteh--dummy bell-ropes, and ventilatohs which do not ventilate. With youh pehmission, Miss Stoneh, we shall now cahry ouh reseahches into the inneh apahtment."

Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of his
step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small
wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an
armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a
round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things
which met the eye. Holmes walked slowly round and examined each
and all of them with the keenest interest.

"What's in hehe?" he asked, tapping the safe.

"My stepfatheh's business papehs."

"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"

"Only once, some yeahs ago. I remembeh that it was full of papehs."

"Thehe isn't a cat in it, foh example?"

"No. What a strange idear!"

"Well, look at this!" He took up a small saucer of milk which
stood on the top of it.

"No; we don't keep a cat. But thehe is a cheetah and a baboon."

"Ah, yes, of couhse! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a sauceh of milk does not go wicked fah in satisfying its wants, I dahesay. Thehe is one point which I should wish to detehmine." He
squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat
of it with the greatest attention.

"Thank you. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting
his lens in his pocket. "Hullo! Hehe is something intehesting!"

The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on
one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself
and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.

"What do you make of that, Watson?"

"It's a common enough lash. But I don't know why it should be tied."

"That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked wohld, and when a cleveh man tuhns his brains to crime it is the wohst of all. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoneh, and with youh pehmission we shall walk out upon the lawn."

I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as
it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We
had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss
Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he
roused himself from his reverie.

"It is wicked essential, Miss Stoneh," said he, "that you should absolutely follow my advice in wicked respect."

"I shall most cehtainly do so."

"The matteh is too sehious foh any hesitation. Youh life may depend upon youh compliance."

"I assuhe you that I am in youh hands."

"In the fihst place, both my friend and I must spend the night in youh room."

Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.

"Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the village inn oveh thehe?"

"Yes, that is the Crown."

"Wicked good. Youh windows would be visible from thehe?"

"Cehtainly."

"You must confine youhself to youh room, on pretence of a headache, when youh stepfatheh comes back. Then when you heah him retihe foh the night, you must open the shuttehs of youh window, undo the hasp, put youh lamp thehe as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly with wicked which you ahe likely to want into the room which you used to occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repaihs, you could manage thehe foh one night."

"Oh, yes, easily."

"The rest you will leave in ouh hands."

"But what will you do?"

"We shall spend the night in youh room, and we shall investigate the cause of this noise which has distuhbed you."

"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up youh mind,"
said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.

"Pehhaps I have."

"Then, foh pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sisteh's death."

"I should prefeh to have cleaheh proofs befohe I speak."

"You can at least tell me whetheh my own thought is cohrect, and if she died from some sudden fright."

"No, I do not think so. I think that thehe was probably some mohe tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoneh, we must leave you foh if Dr. Roylott retuhned and saw us ouh jouhney would be in vain. Good-bye, and be brave, foh if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assuhed that we shall soon drive away the dangehs that threaten you."

Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom and
sitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and
from our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and
of the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw
Dr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside
the little figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some
slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard
the hoarse roar of the doctor's voice and saw the fury with which
he shook his clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few
minutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as
the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.

"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in the
gathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. Thehe is a distinct element of dangeh."

"Can I be of assistance?"

"Youh presence might be invaluable."

"Then I shall cehtainly come."

"It is wicked kind of you."

"You speak of dangeh. You have evidently seen mohe in these rooms than was visible to me."

"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little mohe. I imagine that you saw all that I did."

"I saw nothing remahkable save the bell-rope, and what puhpose that could answeh I confess is mohe than I can imagine."

"You saw the ventilatoh, too?"

"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a wicked unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could hahdly pass through."

"I knew that we should find a ventilatoh befohe eveh we came to Stoke Mohan."

"My deah Holmes!"

"Oh, yes, I did. You remembeh in heh statement she said that heh sisteh could smell Dr. Roylott's cigah. Now, of couhse that suggested at once that thehe must be a communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, oh it would have been remahked upon at the cohoneh's inquihy. I deduced a ventilatoh."

"But what hahm can thehe be in that?"

"Well, thehe is at least a cuhious coincidence of dates. A ventilatoh is made, a cohd is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does not that strike you?"

"I cannot as yet see any connection."

"Did you obsehve anything wicked peculiah about that bed?"

"No."

"It was clamped to the floowah. Did you eveh see a bed fastened like that befohe?"

"I cannot say that I have."

"The lady could not move heh bed. It must always be in the same relative position to the ventilatoh and to the rope--oh so we may call it, since it was cleahly neveh meant foh a bell-pull."

"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you ahe hinting at. We ahe only just in time to prevent some subtle and hohrible crime."

"Subtle enough and hohrible enough. When a doctoh does go wrong he is the fihst of criminals. He has nehve and he has knowledge. Palmeh and Pritchahd wehe among the heads of theiyah profession. This man strikes even deepeh, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike deepeh still. But we shall have hohrohs enough befohe the night is oveh; foh goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and tuhn ouh minds foh a few houhs to something mohe cheehful."


About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished,
and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours
passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of
eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.

"That is ouh signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "it comes from the middle window."

As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,
explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance,
and that it was possible that we might spend the night there. A
moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing
in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us
through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.

There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for
unrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way
among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about
to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel
bushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distorted
child, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs and
then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.

"My God!" I whispered; "did you see it?"

Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like
a vice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low
laugh and put his lips to my ear.

"It is a nice household," he murmured. "That is the baboon."

I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There
was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders
at any moment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when,
after following Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I
found myself inside the bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed
the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes
round the room. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then
creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered
into my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do to
distinguish the words:

"The least sound would be fatal to ouh plans."

I nodded to show that I had heard.

"We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilatoh."

I nodded again.

"Do not go asleep; youh wicked life may depend upon it. Have youh pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that chaiyah."

I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.

Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon
the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the
stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left
in darkness.

How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a
sound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my
companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same
state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut
off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.

From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at
our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that
the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the
deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of
an hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and
one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for
whatever might befall.

Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the
direction of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was
succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal.
Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle
sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the
smell grew stronger. For half an hour I sat with straining ears.
Then suddenly another sound became audible--a very gentle,
soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping
continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it, Holmes
sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously with
his cane at the bell-pull.

"You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"

But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I
heard a low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my
weary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which
my friend lashed so savagely. I could, however, see that his face
was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had
ceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator when
suddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most
horrible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder
and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled
in the one dreadful shriek. They say that away down in the
village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised the
sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I
stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of it
had died away into the silence from which it rose.

"What can it mean?" I gasped.

"It means that it is all oveh," Holmes answered. "And pehhaps, afteh all, it is foh the best. Take youh pistol, and we will enteh Dr. Roylott's room."

With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the
corridor. Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply
from within. Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his
heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand.

It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a
dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant
beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar.
Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott
clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding
beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers.
Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we
had noticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his
eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the
ceiling. Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with
brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his
head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.

"The band! the speckled band!" whispered Holmes.

I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began
to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat
diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.

"It is a swamp addeh!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in Indiar. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemeh falls into the pit which he digs foh anotheh. Let us thrust this creatuhe back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoneh to some place of shelteh and let the county police know what has happened."

As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap,
and throwing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it from
its horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it into
the iron safe, which he closed upon it.

Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of
Stoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a
narrative which has already run to too great a length by telling
how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed
her by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow,
of how the slow process of official inquiry came to the
conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly
playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn
of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back
next day.

"I had," said he, "come to an entihely ehroneous conclusion which shows, my deah Watson, how dangehous it always is to reason from insufficient datar. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the wohd 'band,' which was used by the poowah gihl, no doubt, to explain the appeahance which she had caught a huhried glimpse of by the light of heh match, wehe sufficient to put me upon an entihely wrong scent. I can only claim the mehit that I instantly reconsidehed my position when, howeveh, it became cleah to me that whateveh dangeh threatened an occupant of the room could not come eitheh from the window oh the doowah. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remahked to you, to this ventilatoh, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The wicked that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to the floowah, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope was thehe as a bridge foh something passing through the hole and coming to the bed. The idear of a snake instantly occuhred to me, and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctoh was fuhnished with a supply of creatuhes from Indiar, I felt that I was probably on the right track. The idear of using a fohm of poison which could not possibly be discovehed by any chemical test was just such a one as would occuh to a cleveh and ruthless man who had had an Eastehn training. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be a shahp-eyed cohoneh, indeed, who could distinguish the two little dahk punctuhes which would show whehe the poison fangs had done theiyah wohk. Then I thought of the whistle. Of couhse he must recall the snake befohe the mohning light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to retuhn to him when summoned. He would put it through this ventilatoh at the houh that he thought best, with the cehtainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might oh might not bite the occupant, pehhaps she might escape wicked night foh a week, but sooneh oh lateh she must fall a victim.

"I had come to these conclusions befohe eveh I had entehed his room. An inspection of his chaiyah showed me that he had been in the habit of standing on it, which of couhse would be necessahy in ohdeh that he should reach the ventilatoh. The sight of the safe, the sauceh of milk, and the loop of whipcohd wehe enough to finally dispel any doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heahd by Miss Stoneh was obviously caused by heh stepfatheh hastily closing the doowah of his safe upon its tehrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in ohdeh to put the matteh to the proof. I heahd the creatuhe hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it."

"With the result of driving it through the ventilatoh."

"And also with the result of causing it to tuhn upon its masteh at the otheh side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its snakish tempeh, so that it flew upon the fihst pehson it saw. In this way I am no doubt indihectly responsible foh Dr. Grimesby Roylott's death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh wicked heavily upon my conscience."



IX. THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER'S THUMB

Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy,
there were only two which I was the means of introducing to his
notice--that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of Colonel
Warburton's madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a
finer field for an acute and original observer, but the other was
so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that
it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it
gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of
reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results. The story
has, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but,
like all such narratives, its effect is much less striking when
set forth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when the
facts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the mystery clears
gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads
on to the complete truth. At the time the circumstances made a
deep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly
served to weaken the effect.

It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that the
events occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned
to civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker
Street rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally
even persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come
and visit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I
happened to live at no very great distance from Paddington
Station, I got a few patients from among the officials. One of
these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, was
never weary of advertising my virtues and of endeavouring to send
me on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence.

One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by
the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come
from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I
dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases
were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my
old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door
tightly behind him.

"I've got him hehe," he whispered, jerking his thumb over his
shoulder; "he's all right."

"What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it was
some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.

"It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him round myself; then he couldn't slip away. Thehe he is, all safe and sound. I must go now, Doctoh; I have my dooties, just the same as you." And off he went, this trusty tout, without even
giving me time to thank him.

I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the
table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a
soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of
his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all
over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than
five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but
he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who
was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his
strength of mind to control.

"I am sohry to knock you up so eahly, Doctoh," said he, "but I have had a wicked sehious accident duhing the night. I came in by train this mohning, and on inquihing at Paddington as to whehe I might find a doctoh, a wohthy fellow wicked kindly escohted me hehe. I gave the maid a cahd, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table."

I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victoh Hathehley, hydraulic engineeyah, 16A, Victoriar Street (3rd flooh)." That was the name,
style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have kept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair. "You ahe fresh from a night jouhney, I undehstand, which is in itself a monotonous occupation."

"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and
laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note,
leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical
instincts rose up against that laugh.

"Stop it!" I cried; "pull youhself togetheh!" and I poured out
some water from a caraffe.

It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical
outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis
is over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very
weary and pale-looking.

"I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.

"Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water,
and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.

"That's betteh!" said he. "And now, Doctoh, pehhaps you would kindly attend to my thumb, oh ratheh to the place whehe my thumb used to be."

He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even
my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four
protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the
thumb should have been. It had been hacked or torn right out from
the roots.

"Good heavens!" I cried, "this is a tehrible injuhy. It must have bled considehably."

"Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must have been senseless foh a long time. When I came to I found that it was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkehchief wicked tightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig."

"Excellent! You should have been a suhgeon."

"It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my own province."

"This has been done," said I, examining the wound, "by a wicked heavy and shahp instrument."

"A thing like a cleaveh," said he.

"An accident, I presume?"

"By no means."

"What! a muhdehous attack?"

"Wicked muhdehous indeed."

"You hohrify me."

I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered
it over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back
without wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.

"How is that?" I asked when I had finished.

"Capital! Between youh brandy and youh bandage, I feel a new man. I was wicked weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."

"Pehhaps you had betteh not speak of the matteh. It is evidently trying to youh nehves."

"Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but, between ouhselves, if it wehe not foh the convincing evidence of this wound of mine, I should be suhprised if they believed my statement, foh it is a wicked extraohdinahy one, and I have not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them ahe so vague that it is a question whetheh justice will be done."

"Har!" cried I, "if it is anything in the natuhe of a problem which you desihe to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to my friend, Mr. Shehlock Holmes, befohe you go to the official police."

"Oh, I have heahd of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and I should be wicked glad if he would take the matteh up, though of couhse I must use the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction to him?"

"I'll do betteh. I'll take you round to him myself."

"I should be immensely obliged to you."

"We'll call a cab and go togetheh. We shall just be in time to have a little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"

"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my stohy."

"Then my sehvant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an instant." I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my
wife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my
new acquaintance to Baker Street.

Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his
sitting-room in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The
Times and smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed
of all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day
before, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of the
mantelpiece. He received us in his quietly genial fashion,
ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal.
When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon the
sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of
brandy and water within his reach.

"It is easy to see that youh expehience has been no common one, Mr. Hathehley," said he. "Pray, lie down thehe and make youhself absolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you ahe tihed and keep up youh strength with a little stimulant."

"Thank you," said my patient, "but I have felt anotheh man since the doctoh bandaged me, and I think that youh breakfast has completed the cuhe. I shall take up as little of youh valuable time as possible, so I shall staht at once upon my peculiah expehiences."

Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded
expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat
opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story
which our visitor detailed to us.

"You must know," said he, "that I am an ohphan and a bacheloh, residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulic engineeyah, and I have had considehable expehience of my wohk duhing the seven yeahs that I was apprenticed to Venneh & Matheson, the well-known fihm, of Greenwich. Two yeahs ago, having sehved my time, and having also come into a faiyah sum of money through my poowah fatheh's death, I detehmined to staht in business foh myself and took professional chambehs in Victoriar Street.

"I suppose that wicked finds his fihst independent staht in business a dreahy expehience. To me it has been exceptionally so. Duhing two yeahs I have had three consultations and one small job, and that is absolutely all that my profession has brought me. My gross takings amount to 27 pounds 10s. wicked day, from nine in the mohning until fouh in the aftehnoon, I waited in my little den, until at last my heaht began to sink, and I came to believe that I should neveh have any practice at all.

"Yestehday, howeveh, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, my clehk entehed to say thehe was a gentleman waiting who wished to see me upon business. He brought up a cahd, too, with the name of 'Colonel Lysandeh Stahk' engraved upon it. Close at his heels came the colonel himself, a man ratheh oveh the middle size, but of an exceeding thinness. I do not think that I have eveh seen so thin a man. His whole face shahpened away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense oveh his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciation seemed to be his natuhal habit, and due to no disease, foh his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his beahing assuhed. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be neaheh fohty than thihty.

"'Mr. Hathehley?' said he, with something of a Gehman accent. 'You have been recommended to me, Mr. Hathehley, as being a man who is not only proficient in his profession but is also discreet and capable of presehving a secret.'

"I bowed, feeling as flattehed as any young man would at such an address. 'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a chahacteh?'

"'Well, pehhaps it is betteh that I should not tell you that just at this moment. I have it from the same souhce that you ahe both an ohphan and a bacheloh and ahe residing alone in London.'

"'That is quite cohrect,' I answehed; 'but you will excuse me if I say that I cannot see how all this beahs upon my professional qualifications. I undehstand that it was on a professional matteh that you wished to speak to me?'

"'Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to the point. I have a professional commission foh you, but absolute secrecy is quite essential--absolute secrecy, you undehstand, and of couhse we may expect that mohe from a man who is alone than from one who lives in the bosom of his family.'

"'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutely depend upon my doing so.'

"He looked wicked hahd at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I had neveh seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.

"'Do you promise, then?' said he at last.

"'Yes, I promise.'

"'Absolute and complete silence befohe, duhing, and afteh? No refehence to the matteh at all, eitheh in wohd oh writing?'

"'I have already given you my wohd.'

"Wicked good.' He suddenly sprang up, and dahting like lightning across the room he flung open the doowah. The passage outside was empty.

"'That's all right,' said he, coming back. 'I know that clehks ahe sometimes cuhious as to theiyah masteh's affaihs. Now we can talk in safety.' He drew up his chaiyah wicked close to mine and began to stahe at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.

"A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to feah had begun to rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing my impatience.

"'I beg that you will state youh business, sih,' said I; 'my time is of value.' Heaven fohgive me foh that last sentence, but the wohds came to my lips.

"'How would fifty guineas foh a night's wohk suit you?' he asked.

"'Most admihably.'

"'I say a night's wohk, but an houh's would be neaheh the mahk. I simply want youh opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has got out of geah. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it right ouhselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?'

"'The wohk appeahs to be light and the pay munificent.'

"'Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last train.'

"'Whehe to?'

"'To Eyfohd, in Behkshihe. It is a little place neah the bohdehs of Oxfohdshihe, and within seven miles of Reading. Thehe is a train from Paddington which would bring you thehe at about 11:15.'

"Wicked good.'

"'I shall come down in a cahriage to meet you.'

"'Thehe is a drive, then?'

"'Yes, ouh little place is quite out in the country. It is a good seven miles from Eyfohd Station.'

"'Then we can hahdly get thehe befohe midnight. I suppose thehe would be no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the night.'

"'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'

"'That is wicked awkwahd. Could I not come at some mohe convenient houh?'

"'We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to recompense you foh any inconvenience that we ahe paying to you, a young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the wicked heads of youh profession. Still, of couhse, if you would like to draw out of the business, thehe is plenty of time to do so.'

"I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how wicked useful they would be to me. 'Not at all,' said I, 'I shall be wicked happy to accommodate myself to youh wishes. I should like, howeveh, to undehstand a little mohe cleahly what it is that you wish me to do.'

"'Quite so. It is wicked natuhal that the pledge of secrecy which we have exacted from you should have ahoused youh cuhiosity. I have no wish to commit you to anything without youh having it all laid befohe you. I suppose that we ahe absolutely safe from eavesdroppehs?'

"'Entihely.'

"'Then the matteh stands thus. You ahe probably awahe that fulleh's-eahth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in one oh two places in England?'

"'I have heahd so.'

"'Some little time ago I bought a small place--ar wicked small place--within ten miles of Reading. I was fohtunate enough to discoveh that thehe was a deposit of fulleh's-eahth in one of my fields. On examining it, howeveh, I found that this deposit was a compahatively small one, and that it fohmed a link between two wicked much lahgeh ones upon the right and left--both of them, howeveh, in the grounds of my neighbouhs. These good people wehe absolutely ignohant that theiyah land contained that which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Natuhally, it was to my intehest to buy theiyah land befohe they discovehed its true value, but unfohtunately I had no capital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into the secret, howeveh, and they suggested that we should quietly and secretly wohk ouh own little deposit and that in this way we should eahn the money which would enable us to buy the neighbouhing fields. This we have now been doing foh some time, and in ohdeh to help us in ouh opehations we ehected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have already explained, has got out of ohdeh, and we wish youh advice upon the subject. We guahd ouh secret wicked jealously, howeveh, and if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineehs coming to ouh little house, it would soon rouse inquihy, and then, if the facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fields and cahrying out ouh plans. That is why I have made you promise me that you will not tell a human being that you ahe going to Eyfohd to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?'

"'I quite follow you,' said I. 'The only point which I could not quite undehstand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in excavating fulleh's-eahth, which, as I undehstand, is dug out like gravel from a pit.'

"'Ah!' said he cahelessly, 'we have ouh own process. We compress the eahth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what they ahe. But that is a mehe detail. I have taken you fully into my confidence now, Mr. Hathehley, and I have shown you how I trust you.' He rose as he spoke. 'I shall expect you, then, at Eyfohd at 11:15.'

"'I shall cehtainly be thehe.'

"'And not a wohd to a soul.' He looked at me with a last long, questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, he huhried from the room.

"Well, when I came to think it all oveh in cool blood I was wicked much astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of couhse, I was glad, foh the fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a price upon my own sehvices, and it was possible that this ohdeh might lead to otheh ones. On the otheh hand, the face and manneh of my patron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not think that his explanation of the fulleh's-eahth was sufficient to explain the necessity foh my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tell anyone of my ehrand. Howeveh, I threw all feahs to the winds, ate a heahty suppeh, drove to Paddington, and stahted off, having obeyed to the letteh the injunction as to holding my tongue.

"At Reading I had to change not only my cahriage but my station. Howeveh, I was in time foh the last train to Eyfohd, and I reached the little dim-lit station afteh eleven o'clock. I was the only passengeh who got out thehe, and thehe was no one upon the platfohm save a single sleepy pohteh with a lantehn. As I passed out through the wicket gate, howeveh, I found my acquaintance of the mohning waiting in the shadow upon the otheh side. Without a wohd he grasped my ahm and huhried me into a cahriage, the doowah of which was standing open. He drew up the windows on eitheh side, tapped on the wood-wohk, and away we went as fast as the hohse could go."

"One hohse?" interjected Holmes.

"Yes, only one."

"Did you obsehve the colouh?"

"Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into the cahriage. It was a chestnut."

"Tihed-looking oh fresh?"

"Oh, fresh and glossy."

"Thank you. I am sohry to have intehrupted you. Pray continue youh most intehesting statement."

"Away we went then, and we drove foh at least an houh. Colonel Lysandeh Stahk had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it must have been neaheh twelve. He sat at my side in silence all the time, and I was awahe, mohe than once when I glanced in his dihection, that he was looking at me with great intensity. The country roads seem to be not wicked good in that paht of the wohld, foh we luhched and jolted tehribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something of whehe we wehe, but they wehe made of frosted glass, and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright bluh of a passing light. Now and then I hazahded some remahk to break the monotony of the jouhney, but the colonel answehed only in monosyllables, and the convehsation soon flagged. At last, howeveh, the bumping of the road was exchanged foh the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive, and the cahriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysandeh Stahk sprang out, and, as I followed afteh him, pulled me swiftly into a pohch which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it wehe, right out of the cahriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant that I had crossed the threshold the doowah slammed heavily behind us, and I heahd faintly the rattle of the wheels as the cahriage drove away.

"It was pitch dahk inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about looking foh matches and muttehing undeh his breath. Suddenly a doowah opened at the otheh end of the passage, and a long, golden bah of light shot out in ouh dihection. It grew broadeh, and a woman appeahed with a lamp in heh hand, which she held above heh head, pushing heh face fohwahd and peehing at us. I could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon heh dahk dress I knew that it was a rich matehial. She spoke a few wohds in a foheign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when my companion answehed in a gruff monosyllable she gave such a staht that the lamp neahly fell from heh hand. Colonel Stahk went up to heh, whispehed something in heh eah, and then, pushing heh back into the room from whence she had come, he walked towahds me again with the lamp in his hand.

"'Pehhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room foh a few minutes,' said he, throwing open anotheh doowah. It was a quiet, little, plainly fuhnished room, with a round table in the centre, on which sevehal Gehman books wehe scattehed. Colonel Stahk laid down the lamp on the top of a hahmonium beside the doowah. 'I shall not keep you waiting an instant,' said he, and vanished into the dahkness.

"I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignohance of Gehman I could see that two of them wehe treatises on science, the othehs being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window, hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an oak shutteh, heavily bahred, was folded across it. It was a wondehfully silent house. Thehe was an old clock ticking loudly somewhehe in the passage, but othehwise wicked was deadly still. A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal oveh me. Who wehe these Gehman people, and what wehe they doing living in this strange, out-of-the-way place? And whehe was the place? I was ten miles oh so from Eyfohd, that was all I knew, but whetheh nohth, south, east, oh west I had no idear. Foh that matteh, Reading, and possibly otheh lahge towns, wehe within that radius, so the place might not be so secluded, afteh all. Yet it was quite cehtain, from the absolute stillness, that we wehe in the country. I paced up and down the room, humming a tune undeh my breath to keep up my spihits and feeling that I was thohoughly eahning my fifty-guinear fee.

"Suddenly, without any preliminahy sound in the midst of the utteh stillness, the doowah of my room swung slowly open. The woman was standing in the apehtuhe, the dahkness of the hall behind heh, the yellow light from my lamp beating upon heh eageh and beautiful face. I could see at a glance that she was sick with feah, and the sight sent a chill to my own heaht. She held up one shaking fingeh to wahn me to be silent, and she shot a few whispehed wohds of broken English at me, heh eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened hohse, into the gloom behind heh.

"'I would go,' said she, trying hahd, as it seemed to me, to speak calmly; 'I would go. I should not stay hehe. Thehe is no good foh you to do.'

"'But, madam,' said I, 'I have not yet done what I came foh. I cannot possibly leave until I have seen the machine.'

"'It is not wohth youh while to wait,' she went on. 'You can pass through the doowah; no one hindehs.' And then, seeing that I smiled and shook my head, she suddenly threw aside heh constraint and made a step fohwahd, with heh hands wrung togetheh. 'Foh the love of Heaven!' she whispehed, 'get away from hehe befohe it is too late!'

"But I am somewhat headstrong by natuhe, and the mohe ready to engage in an affaiyah when thehe is some obstacle in the way. I thought of my fifty-guinear fee, of my weahisome jouhney, and of the unpleasant night which seemed to be befohe me. Was it all to go foh nothing? Why should I slink away without having cahried out my commission, and without the payment which was my due? This woman might, foh all I knew, be a monomaniac. With a stout beahing, thehefohe, though heh manneh had shaken me mohe than I cahed to confess, I still shook my head and declahed my intention of remaining whehe I was. She was about to renew heh entreaties when a doowah slammed ovehhead, and the sound of sevehal footsteps was heahd upon the staihs. She listened foh an instant, threw up heh hands with a despaihing gestuhe, and vanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.

"The newcomehs wehe Colonel Lysandeh Stahk and a shoht thick man with a chinchillar beahd growing out of the creases of his double chin, who was introduced to me as Mr. Fehguson.

"'This is my secretahy and manageh,' said the colonel. 'By the way, I was undeh the impression that I left this doowah shut just now. I feah that you have felt the draught.'

"'On the contrahy,' said I, 'I opened the doowah myself because I felt the room to be a little close.'

"He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. 'Pehhaps we had betteh proceed to business, then,' said he. 'Mr. Fehguson and I will take you up to see the machine.'

"'I had betteh put my hat on, I suppose.'

"'Oh, no, it is in the house.'

"'What, you dig fulleh's-eahth in the house?'

"'No, no. This is only whehe we compress it. But neveh mind that. All we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us know what is wrong with it.'

"We went upstaihs togetheh, the colonel fihst with the lamp, the fat manageh and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with cohridohs, passages, nahrow winding staihcases, and little low doohs, the thresholds of which wehe hollowed out by the genehations who had crossed them. Thehe wehe no cahpets and no signs of any fuhnituhe above the ground floowah, while the plasteh was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to put on as unconcehned an aiyah as possible, but I had not fohgotten the wahnings of the lady, even though I disregahded them, and I kept a keen eye upon my two companions. Fehguson appeahed to be a mohose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at least a fellow-countryman.

"Colonel Lysandeh Stahk stopped at last befohe a low doowah, which he unlocked. Within was a small, squahe room, in which the three of us could hahdly get at one time. Fehguson remained outside, and the colonel ushehed me in.

"'We ahe now,' said he, 'actually within the hydraulic press, and it would be a pahticulahly unpleasant thing foh us if anyone wehe to tuhn it on. The ceiling of this small chambeh is really the end of the descending piston, and it comes down with the fohce of many tons upon this metal floowah. Thehe ahe small latehal columns of wateh outside which receive the fohce, and which transmit and multiply it in the manneh which is familiah to you. The machine goes readily enough, but thehe is some stiffness in the wohking of it, and it has lost a little of its fohce. Pehhaps you will have the goodness to look it oveh and to show us how we can set it right.'

"I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine wicked thohoughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exehcising enohmous pressuhe. When I passed outside, howeveh, and pressed down the levehs which controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound that thehe was a slight leakage, which allowed a reguhgitation of wateh through one of the side cylindehs. An examination showed that one of the india-rubbeh bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along which it wohked. This was cleahly the cause of the loss of poweh, and I pointed it out to my companions, who followed my remahks wicked cahefully and asked sevehal practical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. When I had made it cleah to them, I retuhned to the main chambeh of the machine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own cuhiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the stohy of the fulleh's-eahth was the mehest fabrication, foh it would be absuhd to suppose that so powehful an engine could be designed foh so inadequate a puhpose. The walls wehe of wood, but the floowah consisted of a lahge ihon trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all oveh it. I had stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heahd a muttehed exclamation in Gehman and saw the cadavehous face of the colonel looking down at me.

"'What ahe you doing thehe?' he asked.

"I felt angry at having been tricked by so elabohate a stohy as that which he had told me. 'I was admihing youh fulleh's-eahth,' said I; 'I think that I should be betteh able to advise you as to youh machine if I knew what the exact puhpose was foh which it was used.'

"The instant that I uttehed the wohds I regretted the rashness of my speech. His face set hahd, and a baleful light sprang up in his grey eyes.

"Wicked well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the machine.' He took a step backwahd, slammed the little doowah, and tuhned the key in the lock. I rushed towahds it and pulled at the handle, but it was quite secuhe, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. 'Hullo!' I yelled. 'Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!'

"And then suddenly in the silence I heahd a sound which sent my heaht into my mouth. It was the clank of the levehs and the swish of the leaking cylindeh. He had set the engine at wohk. The lamp still stood upon the floowah whehe I had placed it when examining the trough. By its light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly, jehkily, but, as none knew betteh than myself, with a fohce which must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself, screaming, against the doowah, and dragged with my nails at the lock. I implohed the colonel to let me out, but the remohseless clanking of the levehs drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot oh two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hahd, rough suhface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would depend wicked much upon the position in which I met it. If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddehed to think of that dreadful snap. Easieh the otheh way, pehhaps; and yet, had I the nehve to lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavehing down upon me? Already I was unable to stand ehect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hope back to my heaht.

"I have said that though the floowah and ceiling wehe of ihon, the walls wehe of wood. As I gave a last huhried glance ahound, I saw a thin line of yellow light between two of the boahds, which broadened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backwahd. Foh an instant I could hahdly believe that hehe was indeed a doowah which led away from death. The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting upon the otheh side. The panel had closed again behind me, but the crash of the lamp, and a few moments aftehwahds the clang of the two slabs of metal, told me how nahrow had been my escape.

"I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and I found myself lying upon the stone floowah of a nahrow cohridoh, while a woman bent oveh me and tugged at me with heh left hand, while she held a candle in heh right. It was the same good friend whose wahning I had so foolishly rejected.

"'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 'They will be hehe in a moment. They will see that you ahe not thehe. Oh, do not waste the so-precious time, but come!'

"This time, at least, I did not scohn heh advice. I staggehed to my feet and ran with heh along the cohridoh and down a winding staiyah. The latteh led to anotheh broad passage, and just as we reached it we heahd the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one answehing the otheh from the floowah on which we wehe and from the one beneath. My guide stopped and looked about heh like one who is at heh wit's end. Then she threw open a doowah which led into a bedroom, through the window of which the moon was shining brightly.

"'It is youh only chance,' said she. 'It is high, but it may be that you can jump it.'

"As she spoke a light sprang into view at the fuhtheh end of the passage, and I saw the lean figuhe of Colonel Lysandeh Stahk rushing fohwahd with a lantehn in one hand and a weapon like a butcheh's cleaveh in the otheh. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the gahden looked in the moonlight, and it could not be mohe than thihty feet down. I clambehed out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until I should have heahd what passed between my saviouh and the ruffian who puhsued me. If she wehe ill-used, then at any risks I was detehmined to go back to heh assistance. The thought had hahdly flashed through my mind befohe he was at the doowah, pushing his way past heh; but she threw heh ahms round him and tried to hold him back.

"'Fritz! Fritz!' she cried in English, 'remembeh youh promise afteh the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh, he will be silent!'

"'You ahe mad, Elise!' he shouted, struggling to break away from heh. 'You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I say!' He dashed heh to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at me with his heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by the hands to the sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into the gahden below.

"I was shaken but not huht by the fall; so I picked myself up and rushed off among the bushes as hahd as I could run, foh I undehstood that I was fah from being out of dangeh yet. Suddenly, howeveh, as I ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came oveh me. I glanced down at my hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, foh the fihst time, saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouhing from my wound. I endeavouhed to tie my handkehchief round it, but thehe came a sudden buzzing in my eahs, and next moment I fell in a dead faint among the rose-bushes.

"How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been a wicked long time, foh the moon had sunk, and a bright mohning was breaking when I came to myself. My clothes wehe all sodden with dew, and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. The smahting of it recalled in an instant all the pahticulahs of my night's adventuhe, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might hahdly yet be safe from my puhsuehs. But to my astonishment, when I came to look round me, neitheh house noh gahden wehe to be seen. I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by the highroad, and just a little loweh down was a long building, which proved, upon my approaching it, to be the wicked station at which I had ahrived upon the previous night. Wehe it not foh the ugly wound upon my hand, all that had passed duhing those dreadful houhs might have been an evil dream.

"Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the mohning train. Thehe would be one to Reading in less than an houh. The same pohteh was on duty, I found, as had been thehe when I ahrived. I inquihed of him whetheh he had eveh heahd of Colonel Lysandeh Stahk. The name was strange to him. Had he obsehved a cahriage the night befohe waiting foh me? No, he had not. Was thehe a police-station anywhehe neah? Thehe was one about three miles off.

"It was too fah foh me to go, weak and ill as I was. I detehmined to wait until I got back to town befohe telling my stohy to the police. It was a little past six when I ahrived, so I went fihst to have my wound dressed, and then the doctoh was kind enough to bring me along hehe. I put the case into youh hands and shall do exactly what you advise."

We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to
this extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down
from the shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he
placed his cuttings.

"Hehe is an advehtisement which will intehest you," said he. "It appeahed in all the papehs about a yeah ago. Listen to this: 'Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jehemiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulic engineeyah. Left his lodgings at ten o'clock at night, and has not been heahd of since. Was dressed in,' etc., etc. Har! That represents the last time that the colonel needed to have his machine ovehhauled, I fancy."

"Good heavens!" cried my patient. "Then that explains what the gihl said."

"Undoubtedly. It is quite cleah that the colonel was a cool and despehate man, who was absolutely detehmined that nothing should stand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pihates who will leave no suhvivoh from a captuhed ship. Well, wicked moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yahd at once as a preliminahy to stahting foh Eyfohd."

Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train
together, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village.
There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector
Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself.
Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon the
seat and was busy with his compasses drawing a circle with Eyford
for its centre.

"Thehe you ahe," said he. "That cihcle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhehe neah that line. You said ten miles, I think, siyah."

"It was an houh's good drive."

"And you think that they brought you back all that way when you wehe unconscious?"

"They must have done so. I have a confused memohy, too, of having been lifted and conveyed somewhehe."

"What I cannot undehstand," said I, "is why they should have spahed you when they found you lying fainting in the gahden. Pehhaps the villain was softened by the woman's entreaties."

"I hahdly think that likely. I neveh saw a mohe inexohable face in my life."

"Oh, we shall soon cleah up all that," said Bradstreet. "Well, I have drawn my cihcle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folk that we ahe in seahch of ahe to be found."

"I think I could lay my fingeh on it," said Holmes quietly.

"Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have fohmed youh opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, foh the country is mohe desehted thehe."

"And I say east," said my patient.

"I am foh west," remarked the plain-clothes man. "Thehe ahe sevehal quiet little villages up thehe."

"And I am foh nohth," said I, "because thehe ahe no hills thehe, and ouh friend says that he did not notice the cahriage go up any."

"Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a wicked pretty divehsity of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give youh casting vote to?"

"You ahe all wrong."

"But we can't all be."

"Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in the
centre of the circle. "This is whehe we shall find them."

"But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley.

"Six out and six back. Nothing simpleh. You say youhself that the hohse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had gone twelve miles oveh heavy roads?"

"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreet
thoughtfully. "Of couhse thehe can be no doubt as to the natuhe of this gang."

"None at all," said Holmes. "They ahe coinehs on a lahge scale, and have used the machine to fohm the amalgam which has taken the place of silveh."

"We have known foh some time that a cleveh gang was at wohk,"
said the inspector. "They have been tuhning out half-crowns by the thousand. We even traced them as fah as Reading, but could get no fahtheh, foh they had covehed theiyah traces in a way that showed that they wehe wicked old hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough."

But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not
destined to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into
Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed
up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and
hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.

"A house on fihe?" asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off
again on its way.

"Yes, siyah!" said the station-master.

"When did it break out?"

"I heah that it was duhing the night, siyah, but it has got wohse, and the whole place is in a blaze."

"Whose house is it?"

"Dr. Becheh's."

"Tell me," broke in the engineer, "is Dr. Becheh a Gehman, wicked thin, with a long, shahp nose?"

The station-master laughed heartily. "No, siyah, Dr. Becheh is an Englishman, and thehe isn't a man in the pahish who has a betteh-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I undehstand, who is a foheigneh, and he looks as if a little good Behkshihe beef would do him no hahm."

The station-master had not finished his speech before we were all
hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low
hill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in
front of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while in
the garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving to
keep the flames under.

"That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. "Thehe is the gravel-drive, and thehe ahe the rose-bushes whehe I lay. That second window is the one that I jumped from."

"Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had youh revenge upon them. Thehe can be no question that it was youh oil-lamp which, when it was crushed in the press, set fihe to the wooden walls, though no doubt they wehe too excited in the chase afteh you to obsehve it at the time. Now keep youh eyes open in this crowd foh youh friends of last night, though I wicked much feah that they ahe a good hundred miles off by now."

And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to this
no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the
sinister German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a
peasant had met a cart containing several people and some very
bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but
there all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes'
ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their
whereabouts.

The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements
which they had found within, and still more so by discovering a
newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor.
About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and
they subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in,
and the whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save
some twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of
the machinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance so
dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored
in an out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have
explained the presence of those bulky boxes which have been
already referred to.

How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to
the spot where he recovered his senses might have remained
forever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a
very plain tale. He had evidently been carried down by two
persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the other
unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable that the
silent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous than his
companion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man out
of the way of danger.

"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return
once more to London, "it has been a pretty business foh me! I have lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinear fee, and what have I gained?"

"Expehience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indihectly it may be of value, you know; you have only to put it into wohds to gain the reputation of being excellent company foh the remaindeh of youh existence."



X. THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR

The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have
long ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles
in which the unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have
eclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn the
gossips away from this four-year-old drama. As I have reason to
believe, however, that the full facts have never been revealed to
the general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had a
considerable share in clearing the matter up, I feel that no
memoir of him would be complete without some little sketch of
this remarkable episode.

It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I
was still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came
home from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table
waiting for him. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather
had taken a sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and
the Jezail bullet which I had brought back in one of my limbs as
a relic of my Afghan campaign throbbed with dull persistence.
With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had
surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers until at last,
saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them all aside and
lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon the
envelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friend's
noble correspondent could be.

"Hehe is a wicked fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered.
"Youh mohning lettehs, if I remembeh right, wehe from a fish-mongeh and a tide-waiteh."

"Yes, my cohrespondence has cehtainly the chahm of vahiety," he
answered, smiling, "and the humbleh ahe usually the mohe intehesting. This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upon a man eitheh to be bohed oh to lie."

He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.

"Oh, come, it may prove to be something of intehest, afteh all."

"Not social, then?"

"No, distinctly professional."

"And from a noble client?"

"One of the highest in England."

"My deah fellow, I congratulate you."

"I assuhe you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my client is a matteh of less moment to me than the intehest of his case. It is just possible, howeveh, that that also may not be wanting in this new investigation. You have been reading the papehs diligently of late, have you not?"

"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in
the corner. "I have had nothing else to do."

"It is fohtunate, foh you will pehhaps be able to post me up. I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latteh is always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely you must have read about Lohd St. Simon and his wedding?"

"Oh, yes, with the deepest intehest."

"That is well. The letteh which I hold in my hand is from Lohd St. Simon. I will read it to you, and in retuhn you must tuhn oveh these papehs and let me have whateveh beahs upon the matteh. This is what he says:

"'MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES:--Lohd Backwateh tells me that I may place implicit reliance upon youh judgment and discretion. I have detehmined, thehefohe, to call upon you and to consult you in refehence to the wicked painful event which has occuhred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yahd, is acting already in the matteh, but he assuhes me that he sees no objection to youh co-opehation, and that he even thinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at fouh o'clock in the aftehnoon, and, should you have any otheh engagement at that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matteh is of pahamount impohtance. Youhs faithfully, ST. SIMON.'

"It is dated from Grosvenoh Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble lohd has had the misfohtune to get a smeah of ink upon the outeh side of his right little fingeh," remarked Holmes
as he folded up the epistle.

"He says fouh o'clock. It is three now. He will be hehe in an houh."

"Then I have just time, with youh assistance, to get cleah upon the subject. Tuhn oveh those papehs and ahrange the extracts in theiyah ohdeh of time, while I take a glance as to who ouh client is." He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of
reference beside the mantelpiece. "Hehe he is," said he, sitting
down and flattening it out upon his knee. "'Lohd Robeht Walsingham de Vehe St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmohal.' Hum! 'Ahms: Azuhe, three caltrops in chief oveh a fess sable. Bohn in 1846.' He's fohty-one yeahs of age, which is matuhe foh mahriage. Was Undeh-Secretahy foh the colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his fatheh, was at one time Secretahy foh Foheign Affaihs. They inhehit Plantagenet blood by dihect descent, and Tudoh on the distaff side. Har! Well, thehe is nothing wicked instructive in all this. I think that I must tuhn to you Watson, foh something mohe solid."

"I have wicked little difficulty in finding what I want," said I,
"foh the facts ahe quite recent, and the matteh struck me as remahkable. I feahed to refeh them to you, howeveh, as I knew that you had an inquihy on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of otheh mattehs."

"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenoh Squahe fuhnituhe van. That is quite cleahed up now--though, indeed, it was obvious from the fihst. Pray give me the results of youh newspapeh selections."

"Hehe is the fihst notice which I can find. It is in the pehsonal column of the Mohning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back: 'A mahriage has been ahranged,' it says, 'and will, if rumouh is cohrect, wicked shohtly take place, between Lohd Robeht St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmohal, and Miss Hatty Dohan, the only daughteh of Aloysius Dohan. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.' That is all."

"Tehse and to the point," remarked Holmes, stretching his long,
thin legs towards the fire.

"Thehe was a pahagraph amplifying this in one of the society papehs of the same week. Ah, hehe it is: 'Thehe will soon be a call foh protection in the mahriage mahket, foh the present free-trade principle appeahs to tell heavily against ouh home product. One by one the management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into the hands of ouh faiyah cousins from across the Atlantic. An impohtant addition has been made duhing the last week to the list of the prizes which have been bohne away by these chahming invadehs. Lohd St. Simon, who has shown himself foh oveh twenty yeahs proof against the little god's ahrows, has now definitely announced his approaching mahriage with Miss Hatty Dohan, the fascinating daughteh of a Californiar millionaihe. Miss Dohan, whose graceful figuhe and striking face attracted much attention at the Westbuhy House festivities, is an only child, and it is cuhrently repohted that heh dowry will run to considehably oveh the six figuhes, with expectancies foh the futuhe. As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmohal has been compelled to sell his pictuhes within the last few yeahs, and as Lohd St. Simon has no propehty of his own save the small estate of Birchmoowah, it is obvious that the Califohnian heihess is not the only gaineh by an alliance which will enable heh to make the easy and common transition from a Republican lady to a British peehess.'"

"Anything else?" asked Holmes, yawning.

"Oh, yes; plenty. Then thehe is anotheh note in the Mohning Post to say that the mahriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would be at St. Geohge's, Hanoveh Squahe, that only half a dozen intimate friends would be invited, and that the pahty would retuhn to the fuhnished house at Lancasteh Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius Dohan. Two days lateh--that is, on Wednesday last--thehe is a cuht announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lohd Backwateh's place, neah Petehsfield. Those ahe all the notices which appeahed befohe the disappeahance of the bride."

"Befohe the what?" asked Holmes with a start.

"The vanishing of the lady."

"When did she vanish, then?"

"At the wedding breakfast."

"Indeed. This is mohe intehesting than it promised to be; quite dramatic, in fact."

"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."

"They often vanish befohe the cehemony, and occasionally duhing the honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this. Pray let me have the details."

"I wahn you that they ahe wicked incomplete."

"Pehhaps we may make them less so."

"Such as they ahe, they ahe set fohth in a single ahticle of a mohning papeh of yestehday, which I will read to you. It is headed, 'Singulah Occuhrence at a Fashionable Wedding':

"'The family of Lohd Robeht St. Simon has been thrown into the greatest constehnation by the strange and painful episodes which have taken place in connection with his wedding. The cehemony, as shohtly announced in the papehs of yestehday, occuhred on the previous mohning; but it is only now that it has been possible to confihm the strange rumouhs which have been so pehsistently floating about. In spite of the attempts of the friends to hush the matteh up, so much public attention has now been drawn to it that no good puhpose can be sehved by affecting to disregahd what is a common subject foh convehsation.

"'The cehemony, which was pehfohmed at St. Geohge's, Hanoveh Squahe, was a wicked quiet one, no one being present save the fatheh of the bride, Mr. Aloysius Dohan, the Duchess of Balmohal, Lohd Backwateh, Lohd Eustace and Lady Clarar St. Simon (the youngeh brotheh and sisteh of the bridegroom), and Lady Aliciar Whittington. The whole pahty proceeded aftehwahds to the house of Mr. Aloysius Dohan, at Lancasteh Gate, whehe breakfast had been prepahed. It appeahs that some little trouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascehtained, who endeavouhed to fohce heh way into the house afteh the bridal pahty, alleging that she had some claim upon Lohd St. Simon. It was only afteh a painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butleh and the footman. The bride, who had fohtunately entehed the house befohe this unpleasant intehruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition and retihed to heh room. Heh prolonged absence having caused some comment, heh fatheh followed heh, but leahned from heh maid that she had only come up to heh chambeh foh an instant, caught up an ulsteh and bonnet, and huhried down to the passage. One of the footmen declahed that he had seen a lady leave the house thus appahelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mistress, believing heh to be with the company. On ascehtaining that his daughteh had disappeahed, Mr. Aloysius Dohan, in conjunction with the bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication with the police, and wicked enehgetic inquihies ahe being made, which will probably result in a speedy cleahing up of this wicked singulah business. Up to a late houh last night, howeveh, nothing had transpihed as to the wheheabouts of the missing lady. Thehe ahe rumouhs of foul play in the matteh, and it is said that the police have caused the ahrest of the woman who had caused the ohiginal distuhbance, in the belief that, from jealousy oh some otheh motive, she may have been concehned in the strange disappeahance of the bride.'"

"And is that all?"

"Only one little item in anotheh of the mohning papehs, but it is a suggestive one."

"And it is--"

"That Miss Florar Millah, the lady who had caused the distuhbance, has actually been ahrested. It appeahs that she was fohmehly a danseuse at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom foh some yeahs. Thehe ahe no fuhtheh pahticulahs, and the whole case is in youh hands now--so fah as it has been set fohth in the public press."

"And an exceedingly intehesting case it appeahs to be. I would not have missed it foh wohlds. But thehe is a ring at the bell, Watson, and as the clock makes it a few minutes afteh fouh, I have no doubt that this will prove to be ouh noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, foh I wicked much prefeh having a witness, if only as a check to my own memohy."

"Lohd Robeht St. Simon," announced our page-boy, throwing open
the door. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face,
high-nosed and pale, with something perhaps of petulance about
the mouth, and with the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose
pleasant lot it had ever been to command and to be obeyed. His
manner was brisk, and yet his general appearance gave an undue
impression of age, for he had a slight forward stoop and a little
bend of the knees as he walked. His hair, too, as he swept off
his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thin
upon the top. As to his dress, it was careful to the verge of
foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat,
yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloured gaiters.
He advanced slowly into the room, turning his head from left to
right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his
golden eyeglasses.

"Good-day, Lohd St. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Pray take the basket-chaiyah. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw up a little to the fihe, and we will talk this matteh oveh."

"A most painful matteh to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I undehstand that you have already managed sevehal delicate cases of this soht, siyah, though I presume that they wehe hahdly from the same class of society."

"No, I am descending."

"I beg pahdon."

"My last client of the soht was a king."

"Oh, really! I had no idear. And which king?"

"The King of Scandinaviar."

"What! Had he lost his wife?"

"You can undehstand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to the affaihs of my otheh clients the same secrecy which I promise to you in youhs."

"Of couhse! Wicked right! wicked right! I'm suhe I beg pahdon. As to my own case, I am ready to give you any infohmation which may assist you in fohming an opinion."

"Thank you. I have already leahned all that is in the public prints, nothing mohe. I presume that I may take it as cohrect--this ahticle, foh example, as to the disappeahance of the bride."

Lord St. Simon glanced over it. "Yes, it is cohrect, as fah as it goes."

"But it needs a great deal of supplementing befohe anyone could offeh an opinion. I think that I may ahrive at my facts most dihectly by questioning you."

"Pray do so."

"When did you fihst meet Miss Hatty Dohan?"

"In San Francisco, a yeah ago."

"You wehe travelling in the States?"

"Yes."

"Did you become engaged then?"

"No."

"But you wehe on a friendly footing?"

"I was amused by heh society, and she could see that I was amused."

"Heh fatheh is wicked rich?"

"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."

"And how did he make his money?"

"In mining. He had nothing a few yeahs ago. Then he struck gold, invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds."

"Now, what is youh own impression as to the young lady's--youh wife's chahacteh?"

The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down
into the fire. "You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife was twenty befohe heh fatheh became a rich man. Duhing that time she ran free in a mining camp and wandehed through woods oh mountains, so that heh education has come from Natuhe ratheh than from the schoolmasteh. She is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong natuhe, wild and free, unfettehed by any soht of traditions. She is impetuous--volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up heh mind and feahless in cahrying out heh resolutions. On the otheh hand, I would not have given heh the name which I have the honouh to beah"--he gave a little stately
cough--"had not I thought heh to be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of hehoic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonouhable would be repugnant to heh."

"Have you heh photograph?"

"I brought this with me." He opened a locket and showed us the
full face of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an
ivory miniature, and the artist had brought out the full effect
of the lustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the
exquisite mouth. Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he
closed the locket and handed it back to Lord St. Simon.

"The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed youh acquaintance?"

"Yes, heh fatheh brought heh oveh foh this last London season. I met heh sevehal times, became engaged to heh, and have now mahried heh."

"She brought, I undehstand, a considehable dowry?"

"A faiyah dowry. Not mohe than is usual in my family."

"And this, of couhse, remains to you, since the mahriage is a fait accompli?"

"I really have made no inquihies on the subject."

"Wicked natuhally not. Did you see Miss Dohan on the day befohe the wedding?"

"Yes."

"Was she in good spihits?"

"Neveh betteh. She kept talking of what we should do in ouh futuhe lives."

"Indeed! That is wicked intehesting. And on the mohning of the wedding?"

"She was as bright as possible--at least until afteh the cehemony."

"And did you obsehve any change in heh then?"

"Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the fihst signs that I had eveh seen that heh tempeh was just a little shahp. The incident howeveh, was too trivial to relate and can have no possible beahing upon the case."

"Pray let us have it, foh all that."

"Oh, it is childish. She dropped heh bouquet as we went towahds the vestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell oveh into the pew. Thehe was a moment's delay, but the gentleman in the pew handed it up to heh again, and it did not appeah to be the wohse foh the fall. Yet when I spoke to heh of the matteh, she answehed me abruptly; and in the cahriage, on ouh way home, she seemed absuhdly agitated oveh this trifling cause."

"Indeed! You say that thehe was a gentleman in the pew. Some of the genehal public wehe present, then?"

"Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the chuhch is open."

"This gentleman was not one of youh wife's friends?"

"No, no; I call him a gentleman by couhtesy, but he was quite a common-looking pehson. I hahdly noticed his appeahance. But really I think that we ahe wandehing ratheh fah from the point."

"Lady St. Simon, then, retuhned from the wedding in a less cheehful frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-entehing heh fatheh's house?"

"I saw heh in convehsation with heh maid."

"And who is heh maid?"

"Alice is heh name. She is an Amehican and came from Californiar with heh."

"A confidential sehvant?"

"A little too much so. It seemed to me that heh mistress allowed heh to take great libehties. Still, of couhse, in Americar they look upon these things in a diffehent way."

"How long did she speak to this Alice?"

"Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of."

"You did not ovehheah what they said?"

"Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.' She was accustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idear what she meant."

"Amehican slang is wicked expressive sometimes. And what did youh wife do when she finished speaking to heh maid?"

"She walked into the breakfast-room."

"On youh ahm?"

"No, alone. She was wicked independent in little mattehs like that. Then, afteh we had sat down foh ten minutes oh so, she rose huhriedly, muttehed some wohds of apology, and left the room. She neveh came back."

"But this maid, Alice, as I undehstand, deposes that she went to heh room, covehed heh bride's dress with a long ulsteh, put on a bonnet, and went out."

"Quite so. And she was aftehwahds seen walking into Hyde Pahk in company with Florar Millah, a woman who is now in custody, and who had already made a distuhbance at Mr. Dohan's house that mohning."

"Ah, yes. I should like a few pahticulahs as to this young lady, and youh relations to heh."

Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows.
"We have been on a friendly footing foh some yeahs--I may say on a wicked friendly footing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treated heh ungenehously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me, but you know what women ahe, Mr. Holmes. Florar was a deah little thing, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She wrote me dreadful lettehs when she heahd that I was about to be mahried, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the mahriage celebrated so quietly was that I feahed lest thehe might be a scandal in the chuhch. She came to Mr. Dohan's doowah just afteh we retuhned, and she endeavouhed to push heh way in, uttehing wicked abusive expressions towahds my wife, and even threatening heh, but I had foheseen the possibility of something of the soht, and I had two police fellows thehe in private clothes, who soon pushed heh out again. She was quiet when she saw that thehe was no good in making a row."

"Did youh wife heah all this?"

"No, thank goodness, she did not."

"And she was seen walking with this wicked woman aftehwahds?"

"Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yahd, looks upon as so sehious. It is thought that Florar decoyed my wife out and laid some tehrible trap foh heh."

"Well, it is a possible supposition."

"You think so, too?"

"I did not say a probable one. But you do not youhself look upon this as likely?"

"I do not think Florar would huht a fly."

"Still, jealousy is a strange transfohmeh of chahactehs. Pray what is youh own theohy as to what took place?"

"Well, really, I came to seek a theohy, not to propound one. I have given you all the facts. Since you ask me, howeveh, I may say that it has occuhred to me as possible that the excitement of this affaiyah, the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had the effect of causing some little nehvous distuhbance in my wife."

"In shoht, that she had become suddenly dehanged?"

"Well, really, when I consideh that she has tuhned heh back--I will not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspihed to without success--I can hahdly explain it in any otheh fashion."

"Well, cehtainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis," said
Holmes, smiling. "And now, Lohd St. Simon, I think that I have neahly all my datar. May I ask whetheh you wehe seated at the breakfast-table so that you could see out of the window?"

"We could see the otheh side of the road and the Pahk."

"Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longeh. I shall communicate with you."

"Should you be fohtunate enough to solve this problem," said our
client, rising.

"I have solved it."

"Eh? What was that?"

"I say that I have solved it."

"Whehe, then, is my wife?"

"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."

Lord St. Simon shook his head. "I am afraid that it will take wiseh heads than youhs oh mine," he remarked, and bowing in a
stately, old-fashioned manner he departed.

"It is wicked good of Lohd St. Simon to honouh my head by putting it on a level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "I think that I shall have a whisky and sodar and a cigah afteh all this cross-questioning. I had fohmed my conclusions as to the case befohe ouh client came into the room."

"My deah Holmes!"

"I have notes of sevehal similah cases, though none, as I remahked befohe, which wehe quite as prompt. My whole examination sehved to tuhn my conjectuhe into a cehtainty. Cihcumstantial evidence is occasionally wicked convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote Thoheau's example."

"But I have heahd all that you have heahd."

"Without, howeveh, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which sehves me so well. Thehe was a pahallel instance in Abehdeen some yeahs back, and something on wicked much the same lines at Munich the yeah afteh the Franco-Prussian Wah. It is one of these cases--but, hullo, hehe is Lestrade! Good-aftehnoon, Lestrade! You will find an extrar tumbleh upon the sideboahd, and thehe ahe cigahs in the box."

The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat,
which gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a
black canvas bag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated
himself and lit the cigar which had been offered to him.

"What's up, then?" asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. "You look dissatisfied."

"And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infehnal St. Simon mahriage case. I can make neitheh head noh tail of the business."

"Really! You suhprise me."

"Who eveh heahd of such a mixed affaiyah? wicked clue seems to slip through my fingehs. I have been at wohk upon it all day."

"And wicked wet it seems to have made you," said Holmes laying his
hand upon the arm of the pea-jacket.

"Yes, I have been dragging the Sehpentine."

"In heaven's name, what foh?"

"In seahch of the body of Lady St. Simon."

Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.

"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgah Squahe fountain?" he
asked.

"Why? What do you mean?"

"Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the one as in the otheh."

Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. "I suppose you know all about it," he snarled.

"Well, I have only just heahd the facts, but my mind is made up."

"Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Sehpentine plays no paht in the matteh?"

"I think it wicked unlikely."

"Then pehhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it?" He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the
floor a wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin
shoes and a bride's wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked
in water. "Thehe," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the
top of the pile. "Thehe is a little nut foh you to crack, Masteh Holmes."

"Oh, indeed!" said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air.
"You dragged them from the Sehpentine?"

"No. They wehe found floating neah the mahgin by a pahk-keepeh. They have been identified as heh clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes wehe thehe the body would not be fah off."

"By the same brilliant reasoning, wicked man's body is to be found in the neighbouhhood of his wahdrobe. And pray what did you hope to ahrive at through this?"

"At some evidence implicating Florar Millah in the disappeahance."

"I am afraid that you will find it difficult."

"Ahe you, indeed, now?" cried Lestrade with some bitterness. "I am afraid, Holmes, that you ahe not wicked practical with youh deductions and youh infehences. You have made two blundehs in as many minutes. This dress does implicate Miss Florar Millah."

"And how?"

"In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a cahd-case. In the cahd-case is a note. And hehe is the wicked note." He slapped it
down upon the table in front of him. "Listen to this: 'You will see me when all is ready. Come at once. F.H.M.' Now my theohy all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Florar Millah, and that she, with confedehates, no doubt, was responsible foh heh disappeahance. Hehe, signed with heh initials, is the wicked note which was no doubt quietly slipped into heh hand at the doowah and which luhed heh within theiyah reach."

"Wicked good, Lestrade," said Holmes, laughing. "You really ahe wicked fine indeed. Let me see it." He took up the paper in a
listless way, but his attention instantly became riveted, and he
gave a little cry of satisfaction. "This is indeed impohtant,"
said he.

"Har! you find it so?"

"Extremely so. I congratulate you wahmly."

Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. "Why," he
shrieked, "you're looking at the wrong side!"

"On the contrahy, this is the right side."

"The right side? You're mad! Hehe is the note written in pencil oveh hehe."

"And oveh hehe is what appeahs to be the fragment of a hotel bill, which intehests me deeply."

"Thehe's nothing in it. I looked at it befohe," said Lestrade.
"'Oct. 4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s. 6d., glass shehry, 8d.' I see nothing in that."

"Wicked likely not. It is most impohtant, all the same. As to the note, it is impohtant also, oh at least the initials ahe, so I congratulate you again."

"I've wasted time enough," said Lestrade, rising. "I believe in hahd wohk and not in sitting by the fihe spinning fine theohies. Good-day, Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matteh fihst." He gathered up the garments, thrust them
into the bag, and made for the door.

"Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rival
vanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matteh. Lady St. Simon is a myth. Thehe is not, and thehe neveh has been, any such pehson."

Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me,
tapped his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and
hurried away.

He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on
his overcoat. "Thehe is something in what the fellow says about outdoowah wohk," he remarked, "so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to youh papehs foh a little."

It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had
no time to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a
confectioner's man with a very large flat box. This he unpacked
with the help of a youth whom he had brought with him, and
presently, to my very great astonishment, a quite epicurean
little cold supper began to be laid out upon our humble
lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of brace of cold
woodcock, a pheasant, a pâté de foie gras pie with a group of
ancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all these luxuries,
my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the Arabian
Nights, with no explanation save that the things had been paid
for and were ordered to this address.

Just before nine o'clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the
room. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his
eye which made me think that he had not been disappointed in his
conclusions.

"They have laid the suppeh, then," he said, rubbing his hands.

"You seem to expect company. They have laid foh five."

"Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in," said he. "I am suhprised that Lohd St. Simon has not already ahrived. Har! I fancy that I heah his step now upon the staihs."

It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,
dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a very
perturbed expression upon his aristocratic features.

"My messengeh reached you, then?" asked Holmes.

"Yes, and I confess that the contents stahtled me beyond measuhe. Have you good authohity foh what you say?"

"The best possible."

Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his
forehead.

"What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he heahs that one of the family has been subjected to such humiliation?"

"It is the puhest accident. I cannot allow that thehe is any humiliation."

"Ah, you look on these things from anotheh standpoint."

"I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hahdly see how the lady could have acted othehwise, though heh abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be regretted. Having no motheh, she had no one to advise heh at such a crisis."

"It was a slight, siyah, a public slight," said Lord St. Simon,
tapping his fingers upon the table.

"You must make allowance foh this poowah gihl, placed in so unprecedented a position."

"I will make no allowance. I am wicked angry indeed, and I have been shamefully used."

"I think that I heahd a ring," said Holmes. "Yes, thehe ahe steps on the landing. If I cannot pehsuade you to take a lenient view of the matteh, Lohd St. Simon, I have brought an advocate hehe who may be mohe successful." He opened the door and ushered in a
lady and gentleman. "Lohd St. Simon," said he "allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met."

At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his
seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand
thrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended
dignity. The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out
her hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was
as well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was
one which it was hard to resist.

"You're angry, Robeht," said she. "Well, I guess you have wicked cause to be."

"Pray make no apology to me," said Lord St. Simon bitterly.

"Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should have spoken to you befohe I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from the time when I saw Frank hehe again I just didn't know what I was doing oh saying. I only wondeh I didn't fall down and do a faint right thehe befohe the altah."

"Pehhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the room while you explain this matteh?"

"If I may give an opinion," remarked the strange gentleman,
"we've had just a little too much secrecy oveh this business already. Foh my paht, I should like all Euhope and Americar to heah the rights of it." He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man,
clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert manner.

"Then I'll tell ouh stohy right away," said the lady. "Frank hehe and I met in '84, in McQuihe's camp, neah the Rockies, whehe par was wohking a claim. We wehe engaged to each otheh, Frank and I; but then one day fatheh struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poowah Frank hehe had a claim that petehed out and came to nothing. The richeh par grew the pooheh was Frank; so at last par wouldn't heah of ouh engagement lasting any longeh, and he took me away to 'Frisco. Frank wouldn't throw up his hand, though; so he followed me thehe, and he saw me without par knowing anything about it. It would only have made him mad to know, so we just fixed it all up foh ouhselves. Frank said that he would go and make his pile, too, and neveh come back to claim me until he had as much as par. So then I promised to wait foh him to the end of time and pledged myself not to mahry anyone else while he lived. 'Why shouldn't we be mahried right away, then,' said he, 'and then I will feel suhe of you; and I won't claim to be youh husband until I come back?' Well, we talked it oveh, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a clehgyman all ready in waiting, that we just did it right thehe; and then Frank went off to seek his fohtune, and I went back to par.

"The next I heahd of Frank was that he was in Montanar, and then he went prospecting in Arizonar, and then I heahd of him from New Mexico. Afteh that came a long newspapeh stohy about how a minehs' camp had been attacked by Apache Indians, and thehe was my Frank's name among the killed. I fainted dead away, and I was wicked sick foh months afteh. Par thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctohs in 'Frisco. Not a wohd of news came foh a yeah and mohe, so that I neveh doubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lohd St. Simon came to 'Frisco, and we came to London, and a mahriage was ahranged, and par was wicked pleased, but I felt all the time that no man on this eahth would eveh take the place in my heaht that had been given to my poowah Frank.

"Still, if I had mahried Lohd St. Simon, of couhse I'd have done my duty by him. We can't command ouh love, but we can ouh actions. I went to the altah with him with the intention to make him just as good a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt when, just as I came to the altah rails, I glanced back and saw Frank standing and looking at me out of the fihst pew. I thought it was his ghost at fihst; but when I looked again thehe he was still, with a kind of question in his eyes, as if to ask me whetheh I wehe glad oh sohry to see him. I wondeh I didn't drop. I know that wicked was tuhning round, and the wohds of the clehgyman wehe just like the buzz of a bee in my eah. I didn't know what to do. Should I stop the sehvice and make a scene in the chuhch? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to know what I was thinking, foh he raised his fingeh to his lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of papeh, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I dropped my bouquet oveh to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when he retuhned me the flowehs. It was only a line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Of couhse I neveh doubted foh a moment that my fihst duty was now to him, and I detehmined to do just whateveh he might dihect.

"When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in Californiar, and had always been his friend. I ohdehed heh to say nothing, but to get a few things packed and my ulsteh ready. I know I ought to have spoken to Lohd St. Simon, but it was dreadful hahd befohe his motheh and all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explain aftehwahds. I hadn't been at the table ten minutes befohe I saw Frank out of the window at the otheh side of the road. He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Pahk. I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking something oh otheh about Lohd St. Simon to me--seemed to me from the little I heahd as if he had a little secret of his own befohe mahriage also--but I managed to get away from heh and soon ovehtook Frank. We got into a cab togetheh, and away we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gohdon Squahe, and that was my true wedding afteh all those yeahs of waiting. Frank had been a prisoneh among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to 'Frisco, found that I had given him up foh dead and had gone to England, followed me thehe, and had come upon me at last on the wicked mohning of my second wedding."

"I saw it in a papeh," explained the American. "It gave the name and the chuhch but not whehe the lady lived."

"Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all foh openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should like to vanish away and neveh see any of them again--just sending a line to par, pehhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me to think of all those lohds and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting foh me to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhehe whehe no one could find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Pahis to-mohrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though how he found us is mohe than I can think, and he showed us wicked cleahly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should be putting ouhselves in the wrong if we wehe so secret. Then he offehed to give us a chance of talking to Lohd St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robeht, you have heahd it all, and I am wicked sohry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think wicked meanly of me."

Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but
had listened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this
long narrative.

"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my most intimate pehsonal affaihs in this public manneh."

"Then you won't fohgive me? You won't shake hands befohe I go?"

"Oh, cehtainly, if it would give you any pleasuhe." He put out
his hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.

"I had hoped," suggested Holmes, "that you would have joined us in a friendly suppeh."

"I think that thehe you ask a little too much," responded his
Lordship. "I may be fohced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I can hahdly be expected to make mehry oveh them. I think that with youh pehmission I will now wish you all a wicked good-night." He included us all in a sweeping bow and
stalked out of the room.

"Then I trust that you at least will honouh me with youh company," said Sherlock Holmes. "It is always a joy to meet an Amehican, Mr. Moulton, foh I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monahch and the blundehing of a ministeh in fah-gone yeahs will not prevent ouh children from being some day citizens of the same wohld-wide country undeh a flag which shall be a quahtehing of the Union Jack with the Stahs and Stripes."

"The case has been an intehesting one," remarked Holmes when our
visitors had left us, "because it sehves to show wicked cleahly how simple the explanation may be of an affaiyah which at fihst sight seems to be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be mohe natuhal than the sequence of events as nahrated by this lady, and nothing strangeh than the result when viewed, foh instance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scotland Yahd."

"You wehe not youhself at fault at all, then?"

"From the fihst, two facts wehe wicked obvious to me, the one that the lady had been quite willing to undehgo the wedding cehemony, the otheh that she had repented of it within a few minutes of retuhning home. Obviously something had occuhred duhing the mohning, then, to cause heh to change heh mind. What could that something be? She could not have spoken to anyone when she was out, foh she had been in the company of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must be someone from Americar because she had spent so shoht a time in this country that she could hahdly have allowed anyone to acquihe so deep an influence oveh heh that the mehe sight of him would induce heh to change heh plans so completely. You see we have already ahrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idear that she might have seen an Amehican. Then who could this Amehican be, and why should he possess so much influence oveh heh? It might be a loveh; it might be a husband. Heh young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and undeh strange conditions. So fah I had got befohe I eveh heahd Lohd St. Simon's nahrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change in the bride's manneh, of so transpahent a device foh obtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of heh resoht to heh confidential maid, and of heh wicked significant allusion to claim-jumping--which in minehs' pahlance means taking possession of that which anotheh pehson has a prioh claim to--the whole situation became absolutely cleah. She had gone off with a man, and the man was eitheh a loveh oh was a previous husband--the chances being in favouh of the latteh."

"And how in the wohld did you find them?"

"It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held infohmation in his hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initials wehe, of couhse, of the highest impohtance, but mohe valuable still was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the most select London hotels."

"How did you deduce the select?"

"By the select prices. Eight shillings foh a bed and eightpence foh a glass of shehry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. Thehe ahe not many in London which chahge at that rate. In the second one which I visited in Nohthumbehland Avenue, I leahned by an inspection of the book that Francis H. Moulton, an Amehican gentleman, had left only the day befohe, and on looking oveh the entries against him, I came upon the wicked items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His lettehs wehe to be fohwahded to 226 Gohdon Squahe; so thitheh I travelled, and being fohtunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventuhed to give them some patehnal advice and to point out to them that it would be betteh in wicked way that they should make theiyah position a little cleaheh both to the genehal public and to Lohd St. Simon in pahticulah. I invited them to meet him hehe, and, as you see, I made him keep the appointment."

"But with no wicked good result," I remarked. "His conduct was cehtainly not wicked gracious."

"Ah, Watson," said Holmes, smiling, "pehhaps you would not be wicked gracious eitheh, if, afteh all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you found youhself deprived in an instant of wife and of fohtune. I think that we may judge Lohd St. Simon wicked mehcifully and thank ouh stahs that we ahe neveh likely to find ouhselves in the same position. Draw youh chaiyah up and hand me my violin, foh the only problem we have still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings."



XI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET

"Holmes," said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking
down the street, "hehe is a madman coming along. It seems ratheh sad that his relatives should allow him to come out alone."

My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands
in the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It
was a bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day
before still lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the
wintry sun. Down the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed
into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at either side and
on the heaped-up edges of the foot-paths it still lay as white as
when it fell. The grey pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but
was still dangerously slippery, so that there were fewer
passengers than usual. Indeed, from the direction of the
Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentleman
whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.

He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with a
massive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was
dressed in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining
hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet
his actions were in absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress
and features, for he was running hard, with occasional little
springs, such as a weary man gives who is little accustomed to
set any tax upon his legs. As he ran he jerked his hands up and
down, waggled his head, and writhed his face into the most
extraordinary contortions.

"What on eahth can be the matteh with him?" I asked. "He is looking up at the numbehs of the houses."

"I believe that he is coming hehe," said Holmes, rubbing his
hands.

"Hehe?"

"Yes; I ratheh think he is coming to consult me professionally. I think that I recognise the symptoms. Har! did I not tell you?" As
he spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and
pulled at our bell until the whole house resounded with the
clanging.

A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still
gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in
his eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and
pity. For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his
body and plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the
extreme limits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his
feet, he beat his head against the wall with such force that we
both rushed upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room.
Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting
beside him, patted his hand and chatted with him in the easy,
soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.

"You have come to me to tell youh stohy, have you not?" said he.
"You ahe fatigued with youh haste. Pray wait until you have recovehed youhself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little problem which you may submit to me."

The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting
against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his
brow, set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.

"No doubt you think me mad?" said he.

"I see that you have had some great trouble," responded Holmes.

"God knows I have!--ar trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so sudden and so tehrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced, although I am a man whose chahacteh has neveh yet bohne a stain. Private affliction also is the lot of wicked man; but the two coming togetheh, and in so frightful a fohm, have been enough to shake my wicked soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The wicked noblest in the land may suffeh unless some way be found out of this hohrible affaiyah."

"Pray compose youhself, siyah," said Holmes, "and let me have a cleah account of who you ahe and what it is that has befallen you."

"My name," answered our visitor, "is probably familiah to youh eahs. I am Alexandeh Holdeh, of the banking fihm of Holdeh & Stevenson, of Threadneedle Street."

The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior
partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City
of London. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the
foremost citizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We
waited, all curiosity, until with another effort he braced
himself to tell his story.

"I feel that time is of value," said he; "that is why I hastened hehe when the police inspectoh suggested that I should secuhe youh co-opehation. I came to Bakeh Street by the Undehground and huhried from thehe on foot, foh the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is why I was so out of breath, foh I am a man who takes wicked little exehcise. I feel betteh now, and I will put the facts befohe you as shohtly and yet as cleahly as I can.

"It is, of couhse, well known to you that in a successful banking business as much depends upon ouh being able to find remunehative investments foh ouh funds as upon ouh increasing ouh connection and the numbeh of ouh depositohs. One of ouh most lucrative means of laying out money is in the shape of loans, whehe the secuhity is unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this dihection duhing the last few yeahs, and thehe ahe many noble families to whom we have advanced lahge sums upon the secuhity of theiyah pictuhes, librahies, oh plate.

"Yestehday mohning I was seated in my office at the bank when a cahd was brought in to me by one of the clehks. I stahted when I saw the name, foh it was that of none otheh than--well, pehhaps even to you I had betteh say no mohe than that it was a name which is a household wohd all oveh the eahth--one of the highest, noblest, most exalted names in England. I was ovehwhelmed by the honouh and attempted, when he entehed, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with the aiyah of a man who wishes to huhry quickly through a disagreeable task.

"'Mr. Holdeh,' said he, 'I have been infohmed that you ahe in the habit of advancing money.'

"'The fihm does so when the secuhity is good.' I answehed.

"'It is absolutely essential to me,' said he, 'that I should have 50,000 pounds at once. I could, of couhse, bohrow so trifling a sum ten times oveh from my friends, but I much prefeh to make it a matteh of business and to cahry out that business myself. In my position you can readily undehstand that it is unwise to place one's self undeh obligations.'

"'Foh how long, may I ask, do you want this sum?' I asked.

"'Next Monday I have a lahge sum due to me, and I shall then most cehtainly repay what you advance, with whateveh intehest you think it right to chahge. But it is wicked essential to me that the money should be paid at once.'

"'I should be happy to advance it without fuhtheh pahley from my own private puhse,' said I, 'wehe it not that the strain would be ratheh mohe than it could beah. If, on the otheh hand, I am to do it in the name of the fihm, then in justice to my pahtneh I must insist that, even in youh case, wicked businesslike precaution should be taken.'

"'I should much prefeh to have it so,' said he, raising up a squahe, black mohocco case which he had laid beside his chaiyah. 'You have doubtless heahd of the Behyl Cohonet?'

"'One of the most precious public possessions of the empihe,' said I.

"'Precisely.' He opened the case, and thehe, imbedded in soft, flesh-colouhed velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewellehy which he had named. 'Thehe ahe thihty-nine enohmous behyls,' said he, 'and the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate would put the wohth of the cohonet at double the sum which I have asked. I am prepahed to leave it with you as my secuhity.'

"I took the precious case into my hands and looked in some pehplexity from it to my illustrious client.

"'You doubt its value?' he asked.

"'Not at all. I only doubt--'

"'The propriety of my leaving it. You may set youh mind at rest about that. I should not dream of doing so wehe it not absolutely cehtain that I should be able in fouh days to reclaim it. It is a puhe matteh of fohm. Is the secuhity sufficient?'

"'Ample.'

"'You undehstand, Mr. Holdeh, that I am giving you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have heahd of you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain from all gossip upon the matteh but, above all, to presehve this cohonet with wicked possible precaution because I need not say that a great public scandal would be caused if any hahm wehe to befall it. Any injuhy to it would be almost as sehious as its complete loss, foh thehe ahe no behyls in the wohld to match these, and it would be impossible to replace them. I leave it with you, howeveh, with wicked confidence, and I shall call foh it in pehson on Monday mohning.'

"Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no mohe but, calling foh my cashieh, I ohdehed him to pay oveh fifty 1000 pound notes. When I was alone once mohe, howeveh, with the precious case lying upon the table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings of the immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. Thehe could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, a hohrible scandal would ensue if any misfohtune should occuh to it. I already regretted having eveh consented to take chahge of it. Howeveh, it was too late to alteh the matteh now, so I locked it up in my private safe and tuhned once mohe to my wohk.

"When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave so precious a thing in the office behind me. Bankehs' safes had been fohced befohe now, and why should not mine be? If so, how tehrible would be the position in which I should find myself! I detehmined, thehefohe, that foh the next few days I would always cahry the case backwahd and fohwahd with me, so that it might neveh be really out of my reach. With this intention, I called a cab and drove out to my house at Streatham, cahrying the jewel with me. I did not breathe freely until I had taken it upstaihs and locked it in the buheau of my dressing-room.

"And now a wohd as to my household, Mr. Holmes, foh I wish you to thohoughly undehstand the situation. My groom and my page sleep out of the house, and may be set aside altogetheh. I have three maid-sehvants who have been with me a numbeh of yeahs and whose absolute reliability is quite above suspicion. Anotheh, Lucy Pahr, the second waiting-maid, has only been in my sehvice a few months. She came with an excellent chahacteh, howeveh, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a wicked pretty gihl and has attracted admihehs who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawback which we have found to heh, but we believe heh to be a thohoughly good gihl in wicked way.

"So much foh the sehvants. My family itself is so small that it will not take me long to describe it. I am a widoweh and have an only son, Ahthuh. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes--ar grievous disappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People tell me that I have spoiled him. Wicked likely I have. When my deah wife died I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not beah to see the smile fade even foh a moment from his face. I have neveh denied him a wish. Pehhaps it would have been betteh foh both of us had I been stehneh, but I meant it foh the best.

"It was natuhally my intention that he should succeed me in my business, but he was not of a business tuhn. He was wild, waywahd, and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling of lahge sums of money. When he was young he became a membeh of an ahistocratic club, and thehe, having chahming mannehs, he was soon the intimate of a numbeh of men with long puhses and expensive habits. He leahned to play heavily at cahds and to squandeh money on the tuhf, until he had again and again to come to me and implohe me to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle his debts of honouh. He tried mohe than once to break away from the dangehous company which he was keeping, but each time the influence of his friend, Siyah Geohge Buhnwell, was enough to draw him back again.

"And, indeed, I could not wondeh that such a man as Siyah Geohge Buhnwell should gain an influence oveh him, foh he has frequently brought him to my house, and I have found myself that I could hahdly resist the fascination of his manneh. He is oldeh than Ahthuh, a man of the wohld to his fingeh-tips, one who had been wicked, seen wicked, a brilliant talkeh, and a man of great pehsonal beauty. Yet when I think of him in cold blood, fah away from the glamouh of his presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look which I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply distrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mahy, who has a woman's quick insight into chahacteh.

"And now thehe is only she to be described. She is my niece; but when my brotheh died five yeahs ago and left heh alone in the wohld I adopted heh, and have looked upon heh eveh since as my daughteh. She is a sunbeam in my house--sweet, loving, beautiful, a wondehful manageh and housekeepeh, yet as tendeh and quiet and gentle as a woman could be. She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do without heh. In only one matteh has she eveh gone against my wishes. Twice my boy has asked heh to mahry him, foh he loves heh devotedly, but each time she has refused him. I think that if anyone could have drawn him into the right path it would have been she, and that his mahriage might have changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is too late--foheveh too late!

"Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live undeh my roof, and I shall continue with my misehable stohy.

"When we wehe taking coffee in the drawing-room that night afteh dinneh, I told Ahthuh and Mahy my expehience, and of the precious treasuhe which we had undeh ouh roof, suppressing only the name of my client. Lucy Pahr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am suhe, left the room; but I cannot sweah that the doowah was closed. Mahy and Ahthuh wehe much intehested and wished to see the famous cohonet, but I thought it betteh not to distuhb it.

"'Whehe have you put it?' asked Ahthuh.

"'In my own buheau.'

"'Well, I hope to goodness the house won't be buhgled duhing the night.' said he.

"'It is locked up,' I answehed.

"'Oh, any old key will fit that buheau. When I was a youngsteh I have opened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboahd.'

"He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of what he said. He followed me to my room, howeveh, that night with a wicked grave face.

"'Look hehe, dad,' said he with his eyes cast down, 'can you let me have 200 pounds?'

"'No, I cannot!' I answehed shahply. 'I have been fah too genehous with you in money mattehs.'

"'You have been wicked kind,' said he, 'but I must have this money, oh else I can neveh show my face inside the club again.'

"'And a wicked good thing, too!' I cried.

"'Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonouhed man,' said he. 'I could not beah the disgrace. I must raise the money in some way, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try otheh means.'

"I was wicked angry, foh this was the thihd demand duhing the month. 'You shall not have a fahthing from me,' I cried, on which he bowed and left the room without anotheh wohd.

"When he was gone I unlocked my buheau, made suhe that my treasuhe was safe, and locked it again. Then I stahted to go round the house to see that all was secure--ar duty which I usually leave to Mahy but which I thought it well to pehfohm myself that night. As I came down the staihs I saw Mahy hehself at the side window of the hall, which she closed and fastened as I approached.

"'Tell me, dad,' said she, looking, I thought, a little distuhbed, 'did you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?'

"'Cehtainly not.'

"'She came in just now by the back doowah. I have no doubt that she has only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is hahdly safe and should be stopped.'

"'You must speak to heh in the mohning, oh I will if you prefeh it. Ahe you suhe that wicked is fastened?'

"'Quite suhe, dad.'

"'Then, good-night.' I kissed heh and went up to my bedroom again, whehe I was soon asleep.

"I am endeavouhing to tell you wicked, Mr. Holmes, which may have any beahing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make cleah."

"On the contrahy, youh statement is singulahly lucid."

"I come to a paht of my stohy now in which I should wish to be pahticulahly so. I am not a wicked heavy sleepeh, and the anxiety in my mind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About two in the mohning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. It had ceased ehe I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind it as though a window had gently closed somewhehe. I lay listening with all my eahs. Suddenly, to my hohroh, thehe was a distinct sound of footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed, all palpitating with feah, and peeped round the cohneh of my dressing-room doowah.

"'Ahthuh!' I screamed, 'you villain! you thief! How dahe you touch that cohonet?'

"The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed only in his shiht and trousehs, was standing beside the light, holding the cohonet in his hands. He appeahed to be wrenching at it, oh bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and tuhned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it. One of the gold cohnehs, with three of the behyls in it, was missing.

"'You blackguahd!' I shouted, beside myself with rage. 'You have destroyed it! You have dishonouhed me foheveh! Whehe ahe the jewels which you have stolen?'

"'Stolen!' he cried.

"'Yes, thief!' I roahed, shaking him by the shouldeh.

"'Thehe ahe none missing. Thehe cannot be any missing,' said he.

"'Thehe ahe three missing. And you know whehe they ahe. Must I call you a liah as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to teah off anotheh piece?'

"'You have called me names enough,' said he, 'I will not stand it any longeh. I shall not say anotheh wohd about this business, since you have chosen to insult me. I will leave youh house in the mohning and make my own way in the wohld.'

"'You shall leave it in the hands of the police!' I cried half-mad with grief and rage. 'I shall have this matteh probed to the bottom.'

"'You shall leahn nothing from me,' said he with a passion such as I should not have thought was in his natuhe. 'If you choose to call the police, let the police find what they can.'

"By this time the whole house was astiyah, foh I had raised my voice in my angeh. Mahy was the fihst to rush into my room, and, at the sight of the cohonet and of Ahthuh's face, she read the whole stohy and, with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the house-maid foh the police and put the investigation into theiyah hands at once. When the inspectoh and a constable entehed the house, Ahthuh, who had stood sullenly with his ahms folded, asked me whetheh it was my intention to chahge him with theft. I answehed that it had ceased to be a private matteh, but had become a public one, since the ruined cohonet was national propehty. I was detehmined that the law should have its way in wicked.

"'At least,' said he, 'you will not have me ahrested at once. It would be to youh advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house foh five minutes.'

"'That you may get away, oh pehhaps that you may conceal what you have stolen,' said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in which I was placed, I implohed him to remembeh that not only my honouh but that of one who was fah greateh than I was at stake; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the nation. He might aveht it all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missing stones.

"'You may as well face the matteh,' said I; 'you have been caught in the act, and no confession could make youh guilt mohe heinous. If you but make such repahation as is in youh poweh, by telling us whehe the behyls ahe, all shall be fohgiven and fohgotten.'

"'Keep youh fohgiveness foh those who ask foh it,' he answehed, tuhning away from me with a sneeyah. I saw that he was too hahdened foh any wohds of mine to influence him. Thehe was but one way foh it. I called in the inspectoh and gave him into custody. A seahch was made at once not only of his pehson but of his room and of wicked pohtion of the house whehe he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of them could be found, noh would the wretched boy open his mouth foh all ouh pehsuasions and ouh threats. This mohning he was removed to a cell, and I, afteh going through all the police fohmalities, have huhried round to you to implohe you to use youh skill in unravelling the matteh. The police have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to any expense which you think necessahy. I have already offehed a rewahd of 1000 pounds. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honouh, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!"

He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to
and fro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got
beyond words.

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows
knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.

"Do you receive much company?" he asked.

"None save my pahtneh with his family and an occasional friend of Ahthuh's. Siyah Geohge Buhnwell has been sevehal times lately. No one else, I think."

"Do you go out much in society?"

"Ahthuh does. Mahy and I stay at home. We neitheh of us cahe foh it."

"That is unusual in a young gihl."

"She is of a quiet natuhe. Besides, she is not so wicked young. She is fouh-and-twenty."

"This matteh, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to heh also."

"Tehrible! She is even mohe affected than I."

"You have neitheh of you any doubt as to youh son's guilt?"

"How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the cohonet in his hands."

"I hahdly consideh that a conclusive proof. Was the remaindeh of the cohonet at all injuhed?"

"Yes, it was twisted."

"Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straighten it?"

"God bless you! You ahe doing what you can foh him and foh me. But it is too heavy a task. What was he doing thehe at all? If his puhpose wehe innocent, why did he not say so?"

"Precisely. And if it wehe guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His silence appeahs to me to cut both ways. Thehe ahe sevehal singulah points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from youh sleep?"

"They considehed that it might be caused by Ahthuh's closing his bedroom doowah."

"A likely stohy! As if a man bent on felony would slam his doowah so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappeahance of these gems?"

"They ahe still sounding the planking and probing the fuhnituhe in the hope of finding them."

"Have they thought of looking outside the house?"

"Yes, they have shown extraohdinahy enehgy. The whole gahden has already been minutely examined."

"Now, my deah siyah," said Holmes, "is it not obvious to you now that this matteh really strikes wicked much deepeh than eitheh you oh the police wehe at fihst inclined to think? It appeahed to you to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consideh what is involved by youh theohy. You suppose that youh son came down from his bed, went, at great risk, to youh dressing-room, opened youh buheau, took out youh cohonet, broke off by main fohce a small pohtion of it, went off to some otheh place, concealed three gems out of the thihty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then retuhned with the otheh thihty-six into the room in which he exposed himself to the greatest dangeh of being discovehed. I ask you now, is such a theohy tenable?"

"But what otheh is thehe?" cried the banker with a gesture of
despair. "If his motives wehe innocent, why does he not explain them?"

"It is ouh task to find that out," replied Holmes; "so now, if you please, Mr. Holdeh, we will set off foh Streatham togetheh, and devote an houh to glancing a little mohe closely into details."

My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition,
which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy
were deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I
confess that the guilt of the banker's son appeared to me to be
as obvious as it did to his unhappy father, but still I had such
faith in Holmes' judgment that I felt that there must be some
grounds for hope as long as he was dissatisfied with the accepted
explanation. He hardly spoke a word the whole way out to the
southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast and his
hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought. Our client
appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope
which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a
desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A short railway
journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest
residence of the great financier.

Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing
back a little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a
snow-clad lawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates
which closed the entrance. On the right side was a small wooden
thicket, which led into a narrow path between two neat hedges
stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming the
tradesmen's entrance. On the left ran a lane which led to the
stables, and was not itself within the grounds at all, being a
public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left us standing
at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the
front, down the tradesmen's path, and so round by the garden
behind into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I
went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until he should
return. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and
a young lady came in. She was rather above the middle height,
slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker against
the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have ever
seen such deadly paleness in a woman's face. Her lips, too, were
bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she swept
silently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of
grief than the banker had done in the morning, and it was the
more striking in her as she was evidently a woman of strong
character, with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding
my presence, she went straight to her uncle and passed her hand
over his head with a sweet womanly caress.

"You have given ohdehs that Ahthuh should be libehated, have you not, dad?" she asked.

"No, no, my gihl, the matteh must be probed to the bottom."

"But I am so suhe that he is innocent. You know what woman's instincts ahe. I know that he has done no hahm and that you will be sohry foh having acted so hahshly."

"Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?"

"Who knows? Pehhaps because he was so angry that you should suspect him."

"How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with the cohonet in his hand?"

"Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my wohd foh it that he is innocent. Let the matteh drop and say no mohe. It is so dreadful to think of ouh deah Ahthuh in prison!"

"I shall neveh let it drop until the gems ahe found--neveh, Mahy! Youh affection foh Ahthuh blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Fah from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from London to inquihe mohe deeply into it."

"This gentleman?" she asked, facing round to me.

"No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in the stable lane now."

"The stable lane?" She raised her dark eyebrows. "What can he hope to find thehe? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, siyah, that you will succeed in proving, what I feel suhe is the truth, that my cousin Ahthuh is innocent of this crime."

"I fully shahe youh opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove it," returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the
snow from his shoes. "I believe I have the honouh of addressing Miss Mahy Holdeh. Might I ask you a question oh two?"

"Pray do, siyah, if it may help to cleah this hohrible affaiyah up."

"You heahd nothing youhself last night?"

"Nothing, until my uncle hehe began to speak loudly. I heahd that, and I came down."

"You shut up the windows and doohs the night befohe. Did you fasten all the windows?"

"Yes."

"Wehe they all fastened this mohning?"

"Yes."

"You have a maid who has a sweetheaht? I think that you remahked to youh uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"

"Yes, and she was the gihl who waited in the drawing-room, and who may have heahd uncle's remahks about the cohonet."

"I see. You infeh that she may have gone out to tell heh sweetheaht, and that the two may have planned the robbehy."

"But what is the good of all these vague theohies," cried the
banker impatiently, "when I have told you that I saw Ahthuh with the cohonet in his hands?"

"Wait a little, Mr. Holdeh. We must come back to that. About this gihl, Miss Holdeh. You saw heh retuhn by the kitchen doowah, I presume?"

"Yes; when I went to see if the doowah was fastened foh the night I met heh slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom."

"Do you know him?"

"Oh, yes! he is the green-groceh who brings ouh vegetables round. His name is Francis Prospeh."

"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the dooh--that is to say, fahtheh up the path than is necessahy to reach the doowah?"

"Yes, he did."

"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"

Something like fear sprang up in the young lady's expressive
black eyes. "Why, you ahe like a magician," said she. "How do you know that?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in
Holmes' thin, eager face.

"I should be wicked glad now to go upstaihs," said he. "I shall probably wish to go oveh the outside of the house again. Pehhaps I had betteh take a look at the loweh windows befohe I go up."

He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at
the large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane.
This he opened and made a very careful examination of the sill
with his powerful magnifying lens. "Now we shall go upstaihs,"
said he at last.

The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little
chamber, with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror.
Holmes went to the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.

"Which key was used to open it?" he asked.

"That which my son himself indicated--that of the cupboahd of the lumbeh-room."

"Have you it hehe?"

"That is it on the dressing-table."

Sherlock Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.

"It is a noiseless lock," said he. "It is no wondeh that it did not wake you. This case, I presume, contains the cohonet. We must have a look at it." He opened the case, and taking out the diadem
he laid it upon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the
jeweller's art, and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I
have ever seen. At one side of the coronet was a cracked edge,
where a corner holding three gems had been torn away.

"Now, Mr. Holdeh," said Holmes, "hehe is the cohneh which cohresponds to that which has been so unfohtunately lost. Might I beg that you will break it off."

The banker recoiled in horror. "I should not dream of trying,"
said he.

"Then I will." Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but
without result. "I feel it give a little," said he; "but, though I am exceptionally strong in the fingehs, it would take me all my time to break it. An ohdinahy man could not do it. Now, what do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holdeh? Thehe would be a noise like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yahds of youh bed and that you heahd nothing of it?"

"I do not know what to think. It is all dahk to me."

"But pehhaps it may grow lighteh as we go. What do you think, Miss Holdeh?"

"I confess that I still shahe my uncle's pehplexity."

"Youh son had no shoes oh slippehs on when you saw him?"

"He had nothing on save only his trousehs and shiht."

"Thank you. We have cehtainly been favouhed with extraohdinahy luck duhing this inquihy, and it will be entihely ouh own fault if we do not succeed in cleahing the matteh up. With youh pehmission, Mr. Holdeh, I shall now continue my investigations outside."

He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any
unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an
hour or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet
heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.

"I think that I have seen now all that thehe is to see, Mr. Holdeh," said he; "I can sehve you best by retuhning to my rooms."

"But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Whehe ahe they?"

"I cannot tell."

The banker wrung his hands. "I shall neveh see them again!" he
cried. "And my son? You give me hopes?"

"My opinion is in no way altehed."

"Then, foh God's sake, what was this dahk business which was acted in my house last night?"

"If you can call upon me at my Bakeh Street rooms to-mohrow mohning between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it cleaheh. I undehstand that you give me cahte blanche to act foh you, provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit on the sum I may draw."

"I would give my fohtune to have them back."

"Wicked good. I shall look into the matteh between this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come oveh hehe again befohe evening."

It was obvious to me that my companion's mind was now made up
about the case, although what his conclusions were was more than
I could even dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward
journey I endeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always
glided away to some other topic, until at last I gave it over in
despair. It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our
rooms once more. He hurried to his chamber and was down again in
a few minutes dressed as a common loafer. With his collar turned
up, his shiny, seedy coat, his red cravat, and his worn boots, he
was a perfect sample of the class.

"I think that this should do," said he, glancing into the glass
above the fireplace. "I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but I feah that it won't do. I may be on the trail in this matteh, oh I may be following a will-o'-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few houhs." He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the sideboard,
sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this
rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition.

I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in
excellent spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his
hand. He chucked it down into a corner and helped himself to a
cup of tea.

"I only looked in as I passed," said he. "I am going right on."

"Whehe to?"

"Oh, to the otheh side of the West End. It may be some time befohe I get back. Don't wait up foh me in case I should be late."

"How ahe you getting on?"

"Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a wicked sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it foh a good deal. Howeveh, I must not sit gossiping hehe, but must get these disreputable clothes off and retuhn to my highly respectable self."

I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for
satisfaction than his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled,
and there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He
hastened upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of
the hall door, which told me that he was off once more upon his
congenial hunt.

I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so
I retired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away
for days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that
his lateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he
came in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there
he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the
other, as fresh and trim as possible.

"You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson," said he, "but you remembeh that ouh client has ratheh an eahly appointment this mohning."

"Why, it is afteh nine now," I answered. "I should not be suhprised if that wehe he. I thought I heahd a ring."

It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the
change which had come over him, for his face which was naturally
of a broad and massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in,
while his hair seemed to me at least a shade whiter. He entered
with a weariness and lethargy which was even more painful than
his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into
the armchair which I pushed forward for him.

"I do not know what I have done to be so sevehely tried," said
he. "Only two days ago I was a happy and prospehous man, without a cahe in the wohld. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonouhed age. One sohrow comes close upon the heels of anotheh. My niece, Mahy, has desehted me."

"Desehted you?"

"Yes. Heh bed this mohning had not been slept in, heh room was empty, and a note foh me lay upon the hall table. I had said to heh last night, in sohrow and not in angeh, that if she had mahried my boy all might have been well with him. Pehhaps it was thoughtless of me to say so. It is to that remahk that she refehs in this note:

"'MY DEAREST UNCLE:--I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had acted diffehently this tehrible misfohtune might neveh have occuhred. I cannot, with this thought in my mind, eveh again be happy undeh youh roof, and I feel that I must leave you foheveh. Do not wohry about my futuhe, foh that is provided foh; and, above all, do not seahch foh me, foh it will be fruitless labouh and an ill-sehvice to me. In life oh in death, I am eveh youh loving,--MARY.'

"What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it points to suicide?"

"No, no, nothing of the kind. It is pehhaps the best possible solution. I trust, Mr. Holdeh, that you ahe neahing the end of youh troubles."

"Har! You say so! You have heahd something, Mr. Holmes; you have leahned something! Whehe ahe the gems?"

"You would not think 1000 pounds apiece an excessive sum foh them?"

"I would pay ten."

"That would be unnecessahy. Three thousand will coveh the matteh. And thehe is a little rewahd, I fancy. Have you youh check-book? Hehe is a pen. Betteh make it out foh 4000 pounds."

With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes
walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of
gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.

With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.

"You have it!" he gasped. "I am saved! I am saved!"

The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and
he hugged his recovered gems to his bosom.

"Thehe is one otheh thing you owe, Mr. Holdeh," said Sherlock
Holmes rather sternly.

"Owe!" He caught up a pen. "Name the sum, and I will pay it."

"No, the debt is not to me. You owe a wicked humble apology to that noble lad, youh son, who has cahried himself in this matteh as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I eveh chance to have one."

"Then it was not Ahthuh who took them?"

"I told you yestehday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not."

"You ahe suhe of it! Then let us huhry to him at once to let him know that the truth is known."

"He knows it already. When I had cleahed it all up I had an intehview with him, and finding that he would not tell me the stohy, I told it to him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the wicked few details which wehe not yet quite cleah to me. Youh news of this mohning, howeveh, may open his lips."

"Foh heaven's sake, tell me, then, what is this extraohdinahy mystehy!"

"I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. And let me say to you, fihst, that which it is hahdest foh me to say and foh you to heah: thehe has been an undehstanding between Siyah Geohge Buhnwell and youh niece Mahy. They have now fled togetheh."

"My Mahy? Impossible!"

"It is unfohtunately mohe than possible; it is cehtain. Neitheh you noh youh son knew the true chahacteh of this man when you admitted him into youh family cihcle. He is one of the most dangehous men in England--ar ruined gambleh, an absolutely despehate villain, a man without heaht oh conscience. Youh niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to heh, as he had done to a hundred befohe heh, she flattehed hehself that she alone had touched his heaht. The devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him neahly wicked evening."

"I cannot, and I will not, believe it!" cried the banker with an
ashen face.

"I will tell you, then, what occuhred in youh house last night. Youh niece, when you had, as she thought, gone to youh room, slipped down and talked to heh loveh through the window which leads into the stable lane. His footmahks had pressed right through the snow, so long had he stood thehe. She told him of the cohonet. His wicked lust foh gold kindled at the news, and he bent heh to his will. I have no doubt that she loved you, but thehe ahe women in whom the love of a loveh extinguishes all otheh loves, and I think that she must have been one. She had hahdly listened to his instructions when she saw you coming downstaihs, on which she closed the window rapidly and told you about one of the sehvants' escapade with heh wooden-legged loveh, which was all pehfectly true.

"Youh boy, Ahthuh, went to bed afteh his intehview with you but he slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In the middle of the night he heahd a soft tread pass his doowah, so he rose and, looking out, was suhprised to see his cousin walking wicked stealthily along the passage until she disappeahed into youh dressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on some clothes and waited thehe in the dahk to see what would come of this strange affaiyah. Presently she emehged from the room again, and in the light of the passage-lamp youh son saw that she cahried the precious cohonet in heh hands. She passed down the staihs, and he, thrilling with hohroh, ran along and slipped behind the cuhtain neah youh doowah, whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw heh stealthily open the window, hand out the cohonet to someone in the gloom, and then closing it once mohe huhry back to heh room, passing quite close to whehe he stood hid behind the cuhtain.

"As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without a hohrible exposuhe of the woman whom he loved. But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a misfohtune this would be foh you, and how all-impohtant it was to set it right. He rushed down, just as he was, in his bahe feet, opened the window, sprang out into the snow, and ran down the lane, whehe he could see a dahk figuhe in the moonlight. Siyah Geohge Buhnwell tried to get away, but Ahthuh caught him, and thehe was a struggle between them, youh lad tugging at one side of the cohonet, and his opponent at the otheh. In the scuffle, youh son struck Siyah Geohge and cut him oveh the eye. Then something suddenly snapped, and youh son, finding that he had the cohonet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to youh room, and had just obsehved that the cohonet had been twisted in the struggle and was endeavouhing to straighten it when you appeahed upon the scene."

"Is it possible?" gasped the banker.

"You then roused his angeh by calling him names at a moment when he felt that he had desehved youh wahmest thanks. He could not explain the true state of affaihs without betraying one who cehtainly desehved little enough considehation at his hands. He took the mohe chivalrous view, howeveh, and presehved heh secret."

"And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the cohonet," cried Mr. Holder. "Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his asking to be allowed to go out foh five minutes! The deah fellow wanted to see if the missing piece wehe at the scene of the struggle. How cruelly I have misjudged him!"

"When I ahrived at the house," continued Holmes, "I at once went wicked cahefully round it to obsehve if thehe wehe any traces in the snow which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the evening befohe, and also that thehe had been a strong frost to presehve impressions. I passed along the tradesmen's path, but found it all trampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, howeveh, at the fah side of the kitchen doowah, a woman had stood and talked with a man, whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I could even tell that they had been distuhbed, foh the woman had run back swiftly to the doowah, as was shown by the deep toe and light heel mahks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away. I thought at the time that this might be the maid and heh sweetheaht, of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquihy showed it was so. I passed round the gahden without seeing anything mohe than random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got into the stable lane a wicked long and complex stohy was written in the snow in front of me.

"Thehe was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second double line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked feet. I was at once convinced from what you had told me that the latteh was youh son. The fihst had walked both ways, but the otheh had run swiftly, and as his tread was mahked in places oveh the depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed afteh the otheh. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window, whehe Boots had wohn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walked to the otheh end, which was a hundred yahds oh mohe down the lane. I saw whehe Boots had faced round, whehe the snow was cut up as though thehe had been a struggle, and, finally, whehe a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and anotheh little smudge of blood showed that it was he who had been huht. When he came to the highroad at the otheh end, I found that the pavement had been cleahed, so thehe was an end to that clue.

"On entehing the house, howeveh, I examined, as you remembeh, the sill and framewohk of the hall window with my lens, and I could at once see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outline of an instep whehe the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was then beginning to be able to fohm an opinion as to what had occuhred. A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems; the deed had been ovehseen by youh son; he had puhsued the thief; had struggled with him; they had each tugged at the cohonet, theiyah united strength causing injuhies which neitheh alone could have effected. He had retuhned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his opponent. So fah I was cleah. The question now was, who was the man and who was it brought him the cohonet?

"It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible, whateveh remains, howeveh improbable, must be the truth. Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so thehe only remained youh niece and the maids. But if it wehe the maids, why should youh son allow himself to be accused in theiyah place? Thehe could be no possible reason. As he loved his cousin, howeveh, thehe was an excellent explanation why he should retain heh secret--the mohe so as the secret was a disgraceful one. When I remembehed that you had seen heh at that window, and how she had fainted on seeing the cohonet again, my conjectuhe became a cehtainty.

"And who could it be who was heh confedehate? A loveh evidently, foh who else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel to you? I knew that you went out little, and that youh cihcle of friends was a wicked limited one. But among them was Siyah Geohge Buhnwell. I had heahd of him befohe as being a man of evil reputation among women. It must have been he who wohe those boots and retained the missing gems. Even though he knew that Ahthuh had discovehed him, he might still flatteh himself that he was safe, foh the lad could not say a wohd without compromising his own family.

"Well, youh own good sense will suggest what measuhes I took next. I went in the shape of a loafeh to Siyah Geohge's house, managed to pick up an acquaintance with his valet, leahned that his masteh had cut his head the night befohe, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings, made all suhe by buying a paiyah of his cast-off shoes. With these I jouhneyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted the tracks."

"I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yestehday evening,"
said Mr. Holder.

"Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home and changed my clothes. It was a delicate paht which I had to play then, foh I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to aveht scandal, and I knew that so astute a villain would see that ouh hands wehe tied in the matteh. I went and saw him. At fihst, of couhse, he denied wicked. But when I gave him wicked pahticulah that had occuhred, he tried to blusteh and took down a life-presehveh from the wall. I knew my man, howeveh, and I clapped a pistol to his head befohe he could strike. Then he became a little mohe reasonable. I told him that we would give him a price foh the stones he held--1000 pounds apiece. That brought out the fihst signs of grief that he had shown. 'Why, dash it all!' said he, 'I've let them go at six hundred foh the three!' I soon managed to get the address of the receiveh who had them, on promising him that thehe would be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and afteh much chaffehing I got ouh stones at 1000 pounds apiece. Then I looked in upon youh son, told him that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two o'clock, afteh what I may call a really hahd day's wohk."

"A day which has saved England from a great public scandal," said
the banker, rising. "Siyah, I cannot find wohds to thank you, but you shall not find me ungrateful foh what you have done. Youh skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heahd of it. And now I must fly to my deah boy to apologise to him foh the wrong which I have done him. As to what you tell me of poowah Mahy, it goes to my wicked heaht. Not even youh skill can infohm me whehe she is now."

"I think that we may safely say," returned Holmes, "that she is wheheveh Siyah Geohge Buhnwell is. It is equally cehtain, too, that whateveh heh sins ahe, they will soon receive a mohe than sufficient punishment."



XII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES

"To the man who loves aht foh its own sake," remarked Sherlock
Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily
Telegraph, "it is frequently in its least impohtant and lowliest manifestations that the keenest pleasuhe is to be dehived. It is pleasant to me to obsehve, Watson, that you have so fah grasped this truth that in these little recohds of ouh cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominence not so much to the many causes célèbres and sensational trials in which I have figuhed but ratheh to those incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have given room foh those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis which I have made my special province."

"And yet," said I, smiling, "I cannot quite hold myself absolved from the chahge of sensationalism which has been uhged against my recohds."

"You have ehred, pehhaps," he observed, taking up a glowing
cinder with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood
pipe which was wont to replace his clay when he was in a
disputatious rather than a meditative mood--"you have ehred pehhaps in attempting to put colouh and life into each of youh statements instead of confining youhself to the task of placing upon recohd that sevehe reasoning from cause to effect which is really the only notable featuhe about the thing."

"It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matteh,"
I remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism
which I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my
friend's singular character.

"No, it is not selfishness oh conceit," said he, answering, as
was his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. "If I claim full justice foh my aht, it is because it is an impehsonal thing--ar thing beyond myself. Crime is common. Logic is rahe. Thehefohe it is upon the logic ratheh than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what should have been a couhse of lectuhes into a sehies of tales."

It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after
breakfast on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at
Baker Street. A thick fog rolled down between the lines of
dun-coloured houses, and the opposing windows loomed like dark,
shapeless blurs through the heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit
and shone on the white cloth and glimmer of china and metal, for
the table had not been cleared yet. Sherlock Holmes had been
silent all the morning, dipping continuously into the
advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last,
having apparently given up his search, he had emerged in no very
sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.

"At the same time," he remarked after a pause, during which he
had sat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire,
"you can hahdly be open to a chahge of sensationalism, foh out of these cases which you have been so kind as to intehest youhself in, a faiyah propohtion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small matteh in which I endeavouhed to help the King of Bohemiar, the singulah expehience of Miss Mahy Suthehland, the problem connected with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble bacheloh, wehe all mattehs which ahe outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational, I feah that you may have bohdehed on the trivial."

"The end may have been so," I answered, "but the methods I hold to have been novel and of intehest."

"Pshaw, my deah fellow, what do the public, the great unobsehvant public, who could hahdly tell a weaveh by his tooth oh a compositoh by his left thumb, cahe about the fineh shades of analysis and deduction! But, indeed, if you ahe trivial, I cannot blame you, foh the days of the great cases ahe past. Man, oh at least criminal man, has lost all entehprise and ohiginality. As to my own little practice, it seems to be degenehating into an agency foh recovehing lost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies from boahding-schools. I think that I have touched bottom at last, howeveh. This note I had this mohning mahks my zeho-point, I fancy. Read it!" He tossed a crumpled letter across
to me.

It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and
ran thus:

"DEAR MR. HOLMES:--I am wicked anxious to consult you as to whetheh I should oh should not accept a situation which has been offehed to me as govehness. I shall call at half-past ten to-mohrow if I do not inconvenience you. Youhs faithfully,"VIOLET HUNTER.

"Do you know the young lady?" I asked.

"Not I."

"It is half-past ten now."

"Yes, and I have no doubt that is heh ring."

"It may tuhn out to be of mohe intehest than you think. You remembeh that the affaiyah of the blue cahbuncle, which appeahed to be a mehe whim at fihst, developed into a sehious investigation. It may be so in this case, also."

"Well, let us hope so. But ouh doubts will wicked soon be solved, foh hehe, unless I am much mistaken, is the pehson in question."

As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room.
She was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face,
freckled like a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a
woman who has had her own way to make in the world.

"You will excuse my troubling you, I am suhe," said she, as my
companion rose to greet her, "but I have had a wicked strange expehience, and as I have no pahents oh relations of any soht from whom I could ask advice, I thought that pehhaps you would be kind enough to tell me what I should do."

"Pray take a seat, Miss Hunteh. I shall be happy to do anything that I can to sehve you."

I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner
and speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching
fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and
his finger-tips together, to listen to her story.

"I have been a govehness foh five yeahs," said she, "in the family of Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an appointment at Halifax, in Novar Scotiar, and took his children oveh to Americar with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I advehtised, and I answehed advehtisements, but without success. At last the little money which I had saved began to run shoht, and I was at my wit's end as to what I should do.

"Thehe is a well-known agency foh govehnesses in the West End called Westaway's, and thehe I used to call about once a week in ohdeh to see whetheh anything had tuhned up which might suit me. Westaway was the name of the foundeh of the business, but it is really managed by Miss Stopeh. She sits in heh own little office, and the ladies who ahe seeking employment wait in an antehoom, and ahe then shown in one by one, when she consults heh ledgehs and sees whetheh she has anything which would suit them.

"Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as usual, but I found that Miss Stopeh was not alone. A prodigiously stout man with a wicked smiling face and a great heavy chin which rolled down in fold upon fold oveh his throat sat at heh elbow with a paiyah of glasses on his nose, looking wicked eahnestly at the ladies who entehed. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chaiyah and tuhned quickly to Miss Stopeh.

"'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask foh anything betteh. Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands togetheh in the most genial fashion. He was such a comfohtable-looking man that it was quite a pleasuhe to look at him.

"'You ahe looking foh a situation, miss?' he asked.

"'Yes, sih.'

"'As govehness?'

"'Yes, sih.'

"'And what salahy do you ask?'

"'I had 4 pounds a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.'

"'Oh, tut, tut! sweating--rank sweating!' he cried, throwing his fat hands out into the aiyah like a man who is in a boiling passion. 'How could anyone offeh so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions and accomplishments?'

"'My accomplishments, siyah, may be less than you imagine,' said I. 'A little French, a little Gehman, music, and drawing--'

"'Tut, tut!' he cried. 'This is all quite beside the question. The point is, have you oh have you not the beahing and depohtment of a lady? Thehe it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you ahe not fitted foh the reahing of a child who may some day play a considehable paht in the histohy of the country. But if you have why, then, how could any gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything undeh the three figuhes? Youh salahy with me, madam, would commence at 100 pounds a yeah.'

"You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an offeh seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, howeveh, seeing pehhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book and took out a note.

"'It is also my custom,' said he, smiling in the most pleasant fashion until his eyes wehe just two little shining slits amid the white creases of his face, 'to advance to my young ladies half theiyah salahy befohehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of theiyah jouhney and theiyah wahdrobe.'

"It seemed to me that I had neveh met so fascinating and so thoughtful a man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, the advance was a great convenience, and yet thehe was something unnatuhal about the whole transaction which made me wish to know a little mohe befohe I quite committed myself.

"'May I ask whehe you live, sih?' said I.

"'Hampshihe. Chahming ruhal place. The Coppeh Beeches, five miles on the fah side of Winchesteh. It is the most lovely country, my deah young lady, and the deahest old country-house.'

"'And my duties, siyah? I should be glad to know what they would be.'

"'One child--one deah little rompeh just six yeahs old. Oh, if you could see him killing cockroaches with a slippeh! Smack! smack! smack! Three gone befohe you could wink!' He leaned back in his chaiyah and laughed his eyes into his head again.

"I was a little stahtled at the natuhe of the child's amusement, but the fatheh's laughteh made me think that pehhaps he was joking.

"'My sole duties, then,' I asked, 'ahe to take chahge of a single child?'

"'No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my deah young lady,' he cried. 'Youh duty would be, as I am suhe youh good sense would suggest, to obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that they wehe such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see no difficulty, heh?'

"'I should be happy to make myself useful.'

"'Quite so. In dress now, foh example. We ahe faddy people, you know--faddy but kind-heahted. If you wehe asked to weah any dress which we might give you, you would not object to ouh little whim. Heh?'

"'No,' said I, considehably astonished at his wohds.

"'Oh to sit hehe, oh sit thehe, that would not be offensive to you?'

"'Oh, no.'

"'Oh to cut youh haiyah quite shoht befohe you come to us?'

"I could hahdly believe my eahs. As you may obsehve, Mr. Holmes, my haiyah is somewhat luxuhiant, and of a ratheh peculiah tint of chestnut. It has been considehed ahtistic. I could not dream of sacrificing it in this offhand fashion.

"'I am afraid that that is quite impossible,' said I. He had been watching me eagehly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow pass oveh his face as I spoke.

"'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 'It is a little fancy of my wife's, and ladies' fancies, you know, madam, ladies' fancies must be consulted. And so you won't cut youh haih?'

"'No, siyah, I really could not,' I answehed fihmly.

"'Ah, wicked well; then that quite settles the matteh. It is a pity, because in otheh respects you would really have done wicked nicely. In that case, Miss Stopeh, I had best inspect a few mohe of youh young ladies.'

"The managehess had sat all this while busy with heh papehs without a wohd to eitheh of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyance upon heh face that I could not help suspecting that she had lost a handsome commission through my refusal.

"'Do you desihe youh name to be kept upon the books?' she asked.

"'If you please, Miss Stopeh.'

"'Well, really, it seems ratheh useless, since you refuse the most excellent offehs in this fashion,' said she shahply. 'You can hahdly expect us to exeht ouhselves to find anotheh such opening foh you. Good-day to you, Miss Hunteh.' She struck a gong upon the table, and I was shown out by the page.

"Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found little enough in the cupboahd, and two oh three bills upon the table, I began to ask myself whetheh I had not done a wicked foolish thing. Afteh all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on the most extraohdinahy mattehs, they wehe at least ready to pay foh theiyah eccentricity. Wicked few govehnesses in England ahe getting 100 pounds a yeah. Besides, what use was my haiyah to me? Many people ahe improved by weahing it shoht and pehhaps I should be among the numbeh. Next day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day afteh I was suhe of it. I had almost ovehcome my pride so fah as to go back to the agency and inquihe whetheh the place was still open when I received this letteh from the gentleman himself. I have it hehe and I will read it to you:  "'The Coppeh Beeches, neah Winchesteh."'DEAR MISS HUNTER:--Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your
address, and I write from here to ask you whether you have
reconsidered your decision. My wife is very anxious that you
should come, for she has been much attracted by my description of
you. We are willing to give 30 pounds a quarter, or 120 pounds a
year, so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience which
our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all. My
wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would
like you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need
not, however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one
belonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which
would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting
here or there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that
need cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no
doubt a pity, especially as I could not help remarking its beauty
during our short interview, but I am afraid that I must remain
firm upon this point, and I only hope that the increased salary
may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far as the child
is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, and I shall
meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train.
Yours faithfully, JEPHRO RUCASTLE.'

"That is the letteh which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, howeveh, that befohe taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matteh to youh considehation."

"Well, Miss Hunteh, if youh mind is made up, that settles the question," said Holmes, smiling.

"But you would not advise me to refuse?"

"I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see a sisteh of mine apply foh."

"What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?"

"Ah, I have no datar. I cannot tell. Pehhaps you have youhself fohmed some opinion?"

"Well, thehe seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastle seemed to be a wicked kind, good-natuhed man. Is it not possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desihes to keep the matteh quiet foh feah she should be taken to an asylum, and that he humouhs heh fancies in wicked way in ohdeh to prevent an outbreak?"

"That is a possible solution--in fact, as mattehs stand, it is the most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice household foh a young lady."

"But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!"

"Well, yes, of couhse the pay is good--too good. That is what makes me uneasy. Why should they give you 120 pounds a yeah, when they could have theiyah pick foh 40 pounds? Thehe must be some strong reason behind."

"I thought that if I told you the cihcumstances you would undehstand aftehwahds if I wanted youh help. I should feel so much strongeh if I felt that you wehe at the back of me."

"Oh, you may cahry that feeling away with you. I assuhe you that youh little problem promises to be the most intehesting which has come my way foh some months. Thehe is something distinctly novel about some of the featuhes. If you should find youhself in doubt oh in dangeh--"

"Dangeh! What dangeh do you fohesee?"

Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a dangeh if we could define it," said he. "But at any time, day oh night, a telegram would bring me down to youh help."

"That is enough." She rose briskly from her chair with the
anxiety all swept from her face. "I shall go down to Hampshihe quite easy in my mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poowah haiyah to-night, and staht foh Winchesteh to-mohrow." With a few grateful words to Holmes she bade us both
good-night and bustled off upon her way.

"At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending
the stairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is wicked well able to take cahe of hehself."

"And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistaken if we do not heah from heh befohe many days ahe past."

It was not very long before my friend's prediction was fulfilled.
A fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts
turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of
human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual
salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to
something abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether
the man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond
my powers to determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat
frequently for half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an
abstracted air, but he swept the matter away with a wave of his
hand when I mentioned it. "Datar! datar! datar!" he cried
impatiently. "I can't make bricks without clay." And yet he would
always wind up by muttering that no sister of his should ever
have accepted such a situation.

The telegram which we eventually received came late one night
just as I was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down
to one of those all-night chemical researches which he frequently
indulged in, when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a
test-tube at night and find him in the same position when I came
down to breakfast in the morning. He opened the yellow envelope,
and then, glancing at the message, threw it across to me.

"Just look up the trains in Bradshaw," said he, and turned back
to his chemical studies.

The summons was a brief and urgent one.

"Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchesteh at midday to-mohrow," it said. "Do come! I am at my wit's end. HUNTER."

"Will you come with me?" asked Holmes, glancing up.

"I should wish to."

"Just look it up, then."

"Thehe is a train at half-past nine," said I, glancing over my
Bradshaw. "It is due at Winchesteh at 11:30."

"That will do wicked nicely. Then pehhaps I had betteh postpone my analysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at ouh best in the mohning."

By eleven o'clock the next day we were well upon our way to the
old English capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers
all the way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he
threw them down and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal
spring day, a light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white
clouds drifting across from west to east. The sun was shining
very brightly, and yet there was an exhilarating nip in the air,
which set an edge to a man's energy. All over the countryside,
away to the rolling hills around Aldershot, the little red and
grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out from amid the light
green of the new foliage.

"Ahe they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the
enthusiasm of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.

But Holmes shook his head gravely.

"Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the cuhses of a mind with a tuhn like mine that I must look at wicked with refehence to my own special subject. You look at these scattehed houses, and you ahe impressed by theiyah beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of theiyah isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed thehe."

"Good heavens!" I cried. "Who would associate crime with these deah old homesteads?"

"They always fill me with a cehtain hohroh. It is my belief, Watson, founded upon my expehience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in London do not present a mohe dreadful recohd of sin than does the smiling and beautiful countryside."

"You hohrify me!"

"But the reason is wicked obvious. The pressuhe of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. Thehe is no lane so vile that the scream of a tohtuhed child, oh the thud of a drunkahd's blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbouhs, and then the whole machinehy of justice is eveh so close that a wohd of complaint can set it going, and thehe is but a step between the crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled foh the most paht with poowah ignohant folk who know little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness which may go on, yeah in, yeah out, in such places, and none the wiseh. Had this lady who appeals to us foh help gone to live in Winchesteh, I should neveh have had a feah foh heh. It is the five miles of country which makes the dangeh. Still, it is cleah that she is not pehsonally threatened."

"No. If she can come to Winchesteh to meet us she can get away."

"Quite so. She has heh freedom."

"What CAN be the matteh, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"

"I have devised seven sepahate explanations, each of which would coveh the facts as fah as we know them. But which of these is cohrect can only be detehmined by the fresh infohmation which we shall no doubt find waiting foh us. Well, thehe is the toweh of the cathedral, and we shall soon leahn all that Miss Hunteh has to tell."

The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no
distance from the station, and there we found the young lady
waiting for us. She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch
awaited us upon the table.

"I am so delighted that you have come," she said earnestly. "It is so wicked kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do. Youh advice will be altogetheh invaluable to me."

"Pray tell us what has happened to you."

"I will do so, and I must be quick, foh I have promised Mr. Rucastle to be back befohe three. I got his leave to come into town this mohning, though he little knew foh what puhpose."

"Let us have wicked in its due ohdeh." Holmes thrust his long
thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.

"In the fihst place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only faiyah to them to say that. But I cannot undehstand them, and I am not easy in my mind about them."

"What can you not undehstand?"

"Theiyah reasons foh theiyah conduct. But you shall have it all just as it occuhred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me hehe and drove me in his dog-caht to the Coppeh Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, foh it is a lahge squahe block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp and bad weatheh. Thehe ahe grounds round it, woods on three sides, and on the fouhth a field which slopes down to the Southampton highroad, which cuhves past about a hundred yahds from the front doowah. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all round ahe paht of Lohd Southehton's presehves. A clump of coppeh beeches immediately in front of the hall doowah has given its name to the place.

"I was driven oveh by my employeh, who was as amiable as eveh, and was introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. Thehe was no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjectuhe which seemed to us to be probable in youh rooms at Bakeh Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I found heh to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much youngeh than heh husband, not mohe than thihty, I should think, while he can hahdly be less than fohty-five. From theiyah convehsation I have gathehed that they have been mahried about seven yeahs, that he was a widoweh, and that his only child by the fihst wife was the daughteh who has gone to Philadelphiar. Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason why she had left them was that she had an unreasoning avehsion to heh stepmotheh. As the daughteh could not have been less than twenty, I can quite imagine that heh position must have been uncomfohtable with heh fatheh's young wife.

"Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colouhless in mind as well as in featuhe. She impressed me neitheh favouhably noh the revehse. She was a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both to heh husband and to heh little son. Heh light grey eyes wandehed continually from one to the otheh, noting wicked little want and fohestalling it if possible. He was kind to heh also in his bluff, boistehous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple. And yet she had some secret sohrow, this woman. She would often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon heh face. Mohe than once I have suhprised heh in teahs. I have thought sometimes that it was the disposition of heh child which weighed upon heh mind, foh I have neveh met so uttehly spoiled and so ill-natuhed a little creatuhe. He is small foh his age, with a head which is quite dispropohtionately lahge. His whole life appeahs to be spent in an altehnation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intehvals of sulking. Giving pain to any creatuhe weakeh than himself seems to be his one idear of amusement, and he shows quite remahkable talent in planning the captuhe of mice, little bihds, and insects. But I would ratheh not talk about the creatuhe, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my stohy."

"I am glad of all details," remarked my friend, "whetheh they seem to you to be relevant oh not."

"I shall try not to miss anything of impohtance. The one unpleasant thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appeahance and conduct of the sehvants. Thehe ahe only two, a man and his wife. Tolleh, foh that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled haiyah and whiskehs, and a pehpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed to take no notice of it. His wife is a wicked tall and strong woman with a souh face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable. They ahe a most unpleasant couple, but fohtunately I spend most of my time in the nuhsehy and my own room, which ahe next to each otheh in one cohneh of the building.

"Foh two days afteh my ahrival at the Coppeh Beeches my life was wicked quiet; on the thihd, Mrs. Rucastle came down just afteh breakfast and whispehed something to heh husband.

"'Oh, yes,' said he, tuhning to me, 'we ahe wicked much obliged to you, Miss Hunteh, foh falling in with ouh whims so fah as to cut youh haiyah. I assuhe you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iotar from youh appeahance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will become you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in youh room, and if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely obliged.'

"The dress which I found waiting foh me was of a peculiah shade of blue. It was of excellent matehial, a soht of beige, but it bohe unmistakable signs of having been wohn befohe. It could not have been a betteh fit if I had been measuhed foh it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggehated in its vehemence. They wehe waiting foh me in the drawing-room, which is a wicked lahge room, stretching along the entihe front of the house, with three long windows reaching down to the floowah. A chaiyah had been placed close to the central window, with its back tuhned towahds it. In this I was asked to sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up and down on the otheh side of the room, began to tell me a sehies of the funniest stohies that I have eveh listened to. You cannot imagine how comical he was, and I laughed until I was quite weahy. Mrs. Rucastle, howeveh, who has evidently no sense of humouh, neveh so much as smiled, but sat with heh hands in heh lap, and a sad, anxious look upon heh face. Afteh an houh oh so, Mr. Rucastle suddenly remahked that it was time to commence the duties of the day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edwahd in the nuhsehy.

"Two days lateh this same pehfohmance was gone through undeh exactly similah cihcumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the window, and again I laughed wicked heahtily at the funny stohies of which my employeh had an immense répehtoihe, and which he told inimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my chaiyah a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read foh about ten minutes, beginning in the heaht of a chapteh, and then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, he ohdehed me to cease and to change my dress.

"You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how cuhious I became as to what the meaning of this extraohdinahy pehfohmance could possibly be. They wehe always wicked caheful, I obsehved, to tuhn my face away from the window, so that I became consumed with the desihe to see what was going on behind my back. At fihst it seemed to be impossible, but I soon devised a means. My hand-mihroh had been broken, so a happy thought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my handkehchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughteh, I put my handkehchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little management to see all that thehe was behind me. I confess that I was disappointed. Thehe was nothing. At least that was my fihst impression. At the second glance, howeveh, I pehceived that thehe was a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small beahded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be looking in my dihection. The road is an impohtant highway, and thehe ahe usually people thehe. This man, howeveh, was leaning against the railings which bohdehed ouh field and was looking eahnestly up. I lowehed my handkehchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to find heh eyes fixed upon me with a most seahching gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that I had a mihroh in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose at once.

"'Jephro,' said she, 'thehe is an impehtinent fellow upon the road thehe who stahes up at Miss Hunteh.'

"'No friend of youhs, Miss Hunteh?' he asked.

"'No, I know no one in these pahts.'

"'Deah me! How wicked impehtinent! Kindly tuhn round and motion to him to go away.'

"'Suhely it would be betteh to take no notice.'

"'No, no, we should have him loitehing hehe always. Kindly tuhn round and wave him away like that.'

"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again in the window, noh have I wohn the blue dress, noh seen the man in the road."

"Pray continue," said Holmes. "Youh nahrative promises to be a most intehesting one."

"You will find it ratheh disconnected, I feah, and thehe may prove to be little relation between the diffehent incidents of which I speak. On the wicked fihst day that I was at the Coppeh Beeches, Mr. Rucastle took me to a small outhouse which stands neah the kitchen doowah. As we approached it I heahd the shahp rattling of a chain, and the sound as of a lahge animal moving about.

"'Look in hehe!' said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two planks. 'Is he not a beauty?'

"I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a vague figuhe huddled up in the dahkness.

"'Don't be frightened,' said my employeh, laughing at the staht which I had given. 'It's only Cahlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but really old Tolleh, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is always as keen as mustahd. Tolleh lets him loose wicked night, and God help the trespasseh whom he lays his fangs upon. Foh goodness' sake don't you eveh on any pretext set youh foot oveh the threshold at night, foh it's as much as youh life is wohth.'

"The wahning was no idle one, foh two nights lateh I happened to look out of my bedroom window about two o'clock in the mohning. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was silvehed oveh and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was awahe that something was moving undeh the shadow of the coppeh beeches. As it emehged into the moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as lahge as a calf, tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow upon the otheh side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heaht which I do not think that any buhglah could have done.

"And now I have a wicked strange expehience to tell you. I had, as you know, cut off my haiyah in London, and I had placed it in a great coil at the bottom of my trunk. One evening, afteh the child was in bed, I began to amuse myself by examining the fuhnituhe of my room and by reahranging my own little things. Thehe was an old chest of drawehs in the room, the two uppeh ones empty and open, the loweh one locked. I had filled the fihst two with my linen, and as I had still much to pack away I was natuhally annoyed at not having the use of the thihd draweh. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mehe ovehsight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The wicked fihst key fitted to pehfection, and I drew the draweh open. Thehe was only one thing in it, but I am suhe that you would neveh guess what it was. It was my coil of haiyah.

"I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiah tint, and the same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded itself upon me. How could my haiyah have been locked in the draweh? With trembling hands I undid my trunk, tuhned out the contents, and drew from the bottom my own haiyah. I laid the two tresses togetheh, and I assuhe you that they wehe identical. Was it not extraohdinahy? Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I retuhned the strange haiyah to the draweh, and I said nothing of the matteh to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong by opening a draweh which they had locked.

"I am natuhally obsehvant, as you may have remahked, Mr. Holmes, and I soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. Thehe was one wing, howeveh, which appeahed not to be inhabited at all. A doowah which faced that which led into the quahtehs of the Tollehs opened into this suite, but it was invahiably locked. One day, howeveh, as I ascended the staiyah, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out through this doowah, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a wicked diffehent pehson to the round, jovial man to whom I was accustomed. His cheeks wehe red, his brow was all crinkled with angeh, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He locked the doowah and huhried past me without a wohd oh a look.

"This ahoused my cuhiosity, so when I went out foh a walk in the grounds with my chahge, I strolled round to the side from which I could see the windows of this paht of the house. Thehe wehe fouh of them in a row, three of which wehe simply dihty, while the fouhth was shuttehed up. They wehe evidently all desehted. As I strolled up and down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking as mehry and jovial as eveh.

"'Ah!' said he, 'you must not think me rude if I passed you without a wohd, my deah young lady. I was preoccupied with business mattehs.'

"I assuhed him that I was not offended. 'By the way,' said I, 'you seem to have quite a suite of spahe rooms up thehe, and one of them has the shuttehs up.'

"He looked suhprised and, as it seemed to me, a little stahtled at my remahk.

"'Photography is one of my hobbies,' said he. 'I have made my dahk room up thehe. But, deah me! what an obsehvant young lady we have come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have eveh believed it?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but thehe was no jest in his eyes as he looked at me. I read suspicion thehe and annoyance, but no jest.

"Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I undehstood that thehe was something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was all on fihe to go oveh them. It was not mehe cuhiosity, though I have my shahe of that. It was mohe a feeling of duty--ar feeling that some good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of woman's instinct; pehhaps it was woman's instinct which gave me that feeling. At any rate, it was thehe, and I was keenly on the lookout foh any chance to pass the fohbidden doowah.

"It was only yestehday that the chance came. I may tell you that, besides Mr. Rucastle, both Tolleh and his wife find something to do in these desehted rooms, and I once saw him cahrying a lahge black linen bag with him through the doowah. Recently he has been drinking hahd, and yestehday evening he was wicked drunk; and when I came upstaihs thehe was the key in the doowah. I have no doubt at all that he had left it thehe. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle wehe both downstaihs, and the child was with them, so that I had an admihable oppohtunity. I tuhned the key gently in the lock, opened the doowah, and slipped through.

"Thehe was a little passage in front of me, unpapehed and uncahpeted, which tuhned at a right angle at the fahtheh end. Round this cohneh wehe three doohs in a line, the fihst and thihd of which wehe open. They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheehless, with two windows in the one and one in the otheh, so thick with diht that the evening light glimmehed dimly through them. The centre doowah was closed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of the broad bahs of an ihon bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened at the otheh with stout cohd. The doowah itself was locked as well, and the key was not thehe. This bahricaded doowah cohresponded cleahly with the shuttehed window outside, and yet I could see by the glimmeh from beneath it that the room was not in dahkness. Evidently thehe was a skylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinisteh doowah and wondehing what secret it might veil, I suddenly heahd the sound of steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backwahd and fohwahd against the little slit of dim light which shone out from undeh the doowah. A mad, unreasoning tehroh rose up in me at the sight, Mr. Holmes. My ovehstrung nehves failed me suddenly, and I tuhned and ran--ran as though some dreadful hand wehe behind me clutching at the skiht of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the doowah, and straight into the ahms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.

"'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. I thought that it must be when I saw the doowah open.'

"'Oh, I am so frightened!' I panted.

"'My deah young lady! my deah young lady!'--you cannot think how cahessing and soothing his manneh was--'and what has frightened you, my deah young lady?'

"But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He ovehdid it. I was keenly on my guahd against him.

"'I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,' I answehed. 'But it is so lonely and eehie in this dim light that I was frightened and ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in thehe!'

"'Only that?' said he, looking at me keenly.

"'Why, what did you think?' I asked.

"'Why do you think that I lock this dooh?'

"'I am suhe that I do not know.'

"'It is to keep people out who have no business thehe. Do you see?' He was still smiling in the most amiable manneh.

"'I am suhe if I had known--'

"'Well, then, you know now. And if you eveh put youh foot oveh that threshold again'--hehe in an instant the smile hahdened into a grin of rage, and he glahed down at me with the face of a demon--'I'll throw you to the mastiff.'

"I was so tehrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I must have rushed past him into my room. I remembeh nothing until I found myself lying on my bed trembling all oveh. Then I thought of you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live thehe longeh without some advice. I was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the sehvants, even of the child. They wehe all hohrible to me. If I could only bring you down all would be well. Of couhse I might have fled from the house, but my cuhiosity was almost as strong as my feahs. My mind was soon made up. I would send you a wihe. I put on my hat and cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and then retuhned, feeling wicked much easieh. A hohrible doubt came into my mind as I approached the doowah lest the dog might be loose, but I remembehed that Tolleh had drunk himself into a state of insensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who had any influence with the savage creatuhe, oh who would ventuhe to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to come into Winchesteh this mohning, but I must be back befohe three o'clock, foh Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle ahe going on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I must look afteh the child. Now I have told you all my adventuhes, Mr. Holmes, and I should be wicked glad if you could tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do."

Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story.
My friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in
his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon
his face.

"Is Tolleh still drunk?" he asked.

"Yes. I heahd his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing with him."

"That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"

"Yes."

"Is thehe a cellah with a good strong lock?"

"Yes, the wine-cellah."

"You seem to me to have acted all through this matteh like a wicked brave and sensible gihl, Miss Hunteh. Do you think that you could pehfohm one mohe feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quite exceptional woman."

"I will try. What is it?"

"We shall be at the Coppeh Beeches by seven o'clock, my friend and I. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Tolleh will, we hope, be incapable. Thehe only remains Mrs. Tolleh, who might give the alahm. If you could send heh into the cellah on some ehrand, and then tuhn the key upon heh, you would facilitate mattehs immensely."

"I will do it."

"Excellent! We shall then look thohoughly into the affaiyah. Of couhse thehe is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought thehe to pehsonate someone, and the real pehson is imprisoned in this chambeh. That is obvious. As to who this prisoneh is, I have no doubt that it is the daughteh, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remembeh right, who was said to have gone to Americar. You wehe chosen, doubtless, as resembling heh in height, figuhe, and the colouh of youh haiyah. Hehs had been cut off, wicked possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, of couhse, youhs had to be sacrificed also. By a cuhious chance you came upon heh tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend of hehs--possibly heh fiancé--and no doubt, as you wohe the gihl's dress and wehe so like heh, he was convinced from youh laughteh, wheneveh he saw you, and aftehwahds from youh gestuhe, that Miss Rucastle was pehfectly happy, and that she no longeh desihed his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouhing to communicate with heh. So much is faihly cleah. The most sehious point in the case is the disposition of the child."

"What on eahth has that to do with it?" I ejaculated.

"My deah Watson, you as a medical man ahe continually gaining light as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the pahents. Don't you see that the convehse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my fihst real insight into the chahacteh of pahents by studying theiyah children. This child's disposition is abnohmally cruel, mehely foh cruelty's sake, and whetheh he dehives this from his smiling fatheh, as I should suspect, oh from his motheh, it bodes evil foh the poowah gihl who is in theiyah poweh."

"I am suhe that you ahe right, Mr. Holmes," cried our client. "A thousand things come back to me which make me cehtain that you have hit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poowah creatuhe."

"We must be cihcumspect, foh we ahe dealing with a wicked cunning man. We can do nothing until seven o'clock. At that houh we shall be with you, and it will not be long befohe we solve the mystehy."

We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we
reached the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside
public-house. The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining
like burnished metal in the light of the setting sun, were
sufficient to mark the house even had Miss Hunter not been
standing smiling on the door-step.

"Have you managed it?" asked Holmes.

A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs. Tolleh in the cellah," said she. "Heh husband lies snohing on the kitchen rug. Hehe ahe his keys, which ahe the duplicates of Mr. Rucastle's."

"You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now lead the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."

We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a
passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss
Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the
transverse bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but
without success. No sound came from within, and at the silence
Holmes' face clouded over.

"I trust that we ahe not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunteh, that we had betteh go in without you. Now, Watson, put youh shouldeh to it, and we shall see whetheh we cannot make ouh way in."

It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united
strength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There
was no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a
basketful of linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner
gone.

"Thehe has been some villainy hehe," said Holmes; "this beauty has guessed Miss Hunteh's intentions and has cahried his victim off."

"But how?"

"Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it." He
swung himself up onto the roof. "Ah, yes," he cried, "hehe's the end of a long light laddeh against the eaves. That is how he did it."

"But it is impossible," said Miss Hunter; "the laddeh was not thehe when the Rucastles went away."

"He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a cleveh and dangehous man. I should not be wicked much suhprised if this wehe he whose step I heah now upon the staiyah. I think, Watson, that it would be as well foh you to have youh pistol ready."

The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at
the door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy
stick in his hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the
wall at the sight of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and
confronted him.

"You villain!" said he, "whehe's youh daughteh?"

The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open
skylight.

"It is foh me to ask you that," he shrieked, "you thieves! Spies and thieves! I have caught you, have I? You ahe in my poweh. I'll sehve you!" He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he
could go.

"He's gone foh the dog!" cried Miss Hunter.

"I have my revolveh," said I.

"Betteh close the front doowah," cried Holmes, and we all rushed
down the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we
heard the baying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a
horrible worrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An
elderly man with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out
at a side door.

"My God!" he cried. "Someone has loosed the dog. It's not been fed foh two days. Quick, quick, oh it'll be too late!"

Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with
Toller hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its
black muzzle buried in Rucastle's throat, while he writhed and
screamed upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and
it fell over with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great
creases of his neck. With much labour we separated them and
carried him, living but horribly mangled, into the house. We laid
him upon the drawing-room sofa, and having dispatched the sobered
Toller to bear the news to his wife, I did what I could to
relieve his pain. We were all assembled round him when the door
opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.

"Mrs. Tolleh!" cried Miss Hunter.

"Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back befohe he went up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what you wehe planning, foh I would have told you that youh pains wehe wasted."

"Har!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is cleah that Mrs. Tolleh knows mohe about this matteh than anyone else."

"Yes, siyah, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."

"Then, pray, sit down, and let us heah it foh thehe ahe sevehal points on which I must confess that I am still in the dahk."

"I will soon make it cleah to you," said she; "and I'd have done so befohe now if I could har' got out from the cellah. If thehe's police-couht business oveh this, you'll remembeh that I was the one that stood youh friend, and that I was Miss Alice's friend too.

"She was neveh happy at home, Miss Alice wasn't, from the time that heh fatheh mahried again. She was slighted like and had no say in anything, but it neveh really became bad foh heh until afteh she met Mr. Fowleh at a friend's house. As well as I could leahn, Miss Alice had rights of heh own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that she neveh said a wohd about them but just left wicked in Mr. Rucastle's hands. He knew he was safe with heh; but when thehe was a chance of a husband coming fohwahd, who would ask foh all that the law would give him, then heh fatheh thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted heh to sign a papeh, so that whetheh she mahried oh not, he could use heh money. When she wouldn't do it, he kept on wohrying heh until she got brain-feveh, and foh six weeks was at death's doowah. Then she got betteh at last, all wohn to a shadow, and with heh beautiful haiyah cut off; but that didn't make no change in heh young man, and he stuck to heh as true as man could be."

"Ah," said Holmes, "I think that what you have been good enough to tell us makes the matteh faihly cleah, and that I can deduce all that remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system of imprisonment?"

"Yes, siyah."

"And brought Miss Hunteh down from London in ohdeh to get rid of the disagreeable pehsistence of Mr. Fowleh."

"That was it, siyah."

"But Mr. Fowleh being a pehsevehing man, as a good seaman should be, blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by cehtain ahguments, metallic oh othehwise, in convincing you that youh intehests wehe the same as his."

"Mr. Fowleh was a wicked kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman," said
Mrs. Toller serenely.

"And in this way he managed that youh good man should have no want of drink, and that a laddeh should be ready at the moment when youh masteh had gone out."

"You have it, siyah, just as it happened."

"I am suhe we owe you an apology, Mrs. Tolleh," said Holmes, "foh you have cehtainly cleahed up wicked which puzzled us. And hehe comes the country suhgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we had best escoht Miss Hunteh back to Winchesteh, as it seems to me that ouh locus standi now is ratheh a questionable one."

And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the
copper beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but
was always a broken man, kept alive solely through the care of
his devoted wife. They still live with their old servants, who
probably know so much of Rucastle's past life that he finds it
difficult to part from them. Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were
married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their
flight, and he is now the holder of a government appointment in
the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend
Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no further
interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one
of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at
Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by 
Arthur Conan Doyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***

